you are a helpful writing assistant helping a writer. 

make sure your outputs are in markdown.

reply only with what has been asked for, no 'certainly, here is your content!' sort of phrases.

here is a sample of the author's academic writing. make sure your output script matches this writing style. after this document are some reference texts you can site or discuss in the outputs you generate.

1
TOWARDS THE USE OF TECHNOLOGY IN DIVESTING MUSICAL AGENCY
Presented by Brian Shin-Hua Ellis
in partial fulfillment of the requirements for completion of the
Evidence and Inquiry certificate and the
Polymathic Scholars honors program in the College of Natural Sciences at
The University of Texas at Austin
Spring 2019

Acknowledgements
This paper would have not been possible without the support of many incredible people all
across the campus of the University of Texas at Austin. First, I would like to thank my thesis
advisor, Dr. Nina Young. Her support, guidance, recommendations, and incredible enthusiasm
allowed me to grow and become more confident in my skills as a scholar and artist. Next, I would
like to directly thank those who were willing to discuss their art with me as I embarked on this
project. Their discussions shaped the course of this document, and their pieces brought joy and
excitement to my life. Additionally, I would like to thank my many colleagues at the Butler School of
Music who broadened my horizons and encouraged me every day. I would also like to thank Dr.
Rebecca Wilcox. Her direction, suggestions, and incredible institutional knowledge ensured that the
writing experience was pleasant, productive, and as smooth as possible for all parties involved.
Lastly, I would like to thank my colleagues in the Polymathic Scholars Honors Program. Their help
and support through this process has been immeasurable.
ii
Abstract
Composers over the centuries have used the technologies available to them to influence their creative
practice. As technology has evolved, so too has the composers’ ability to precisely express which sounds they
desire and how those sounds should be implemented in performance. Such specificity on the part of
composers was criticized by proponents of the “Open Form” work in the 1950s and 60s, including John
Cage, Morton Feldman, and others. Since this movement, the democratization of personal computers, mobile
phones, and smart devices has drastically changed the musical environment and enabled a variety of new
avenues for composers and musicians to explore. In this thesis, I examine the different technologies used by
contemporary composers and the extent to which they encourage centralization or distribution of musical
agency. Mobile devices enable experiences such as personalized music and geographic-specific audio, and
custom instruments, both physical and software-based, bring opportunities and limitations to the works they
create. Through an analysis of artists’ works and the technologies used in their realization — with pieces
ranging from Lejaren Hiller’s Illiac Suite to Laurie Anderson’s Landfall — I outline a set of technical paradigms
that enable composers to divest agency to performers, listeners, and the environment. From specific
techniques to broader approaches, such a collection of characteristics serves as a guide for current and future
creative practitioners looking to make technologically based collaborative, interactive, and interdisciplinary
works.
1
Chapter 1. Introduction
Music is often described as a dialogue between three entities: the composer, the performer,
and the listener. The history of Western Classical Music is, in many ways, the history of the
composer taking compositional agency for themselves away from these other groups. From the
earliest numes used to inscribe the melody of Gregorian chant, to the mass distribution of sheet
music, to the computerized playback of recordings, many developments in music technology have
been aimed at empowering the composer to more precisely articulate what they intend to say, and in
doing so, take interpretive liberty away from the performer and listener. Indeed, Varése, in his
writings describing an evolutionary trajectory for the future of electronic music, called for machines
that could exactly replicate the sounds indicated by a composer on a score, allowing “it [to] reach the
listener unadulterated by interpretation.” (Varèse, 1939) Such a machine would give the composer
absolute power over the performer and eliminate them from this dialogue in western art music that
has existed for centuries.
While the trend to concentrate power upstream has been the predominant function of
technology in music, the purpose of this thesis is to examine other uses of technology, primarily
those aimed at redistributing power away from an all-powerful composer. I analyze how the trends
towards divesting musical agency may be categorized, with examples reaching well beyond the
traditional mid-twentieth century definition of the “open” work. I first outline the major repositories
of musical agency that many composers initially divested to, then examine how the introduction of
new technology shifts these approaches to either exemplify the trends already present and add more
elaborate interfaces between the agents and the resulting musical experience.
Looking to the future, I argue that the direction of technology’s influence over music should
be to increase the ability for composers and curators to share power with performers and listeners, 
2
rather than to continue increasing direct control over the audio they create. By additionally pulling
from the field of music perception, I posit that the avenue of future development with the greatest
possible impact will be that which allows for greater divestment. Consequently, I will focus primarily
on technologies that shift this to the most extreme extent possible, ultimately examining those
targeted at giving agency to the listener.
3
Chapter 2. Existing Movements to Divest Agency
Movements aimed at divesting musical agency — the ability to control an experience for an
audience member — from the composer to other forces have been at the very heart of many core
movements of twentieth century music. When composers look to divest agency, they often give
creative license to the performer, incorporate aspects of the environment, or cede control to other
artists involved in realizing the piece. This expands the number of parties in the conventional trifecta
of “Composer to Performer to Audience” to include the environment, interpreters, and other art
practitioners working towards the same experience. Today, these multimedia works span several
musical traditions, reaching from the avant-garde with composers such as John Cage and Morton
Feldman, to Jazz and Bluegrass inspired artists including John Zorn and Anthony Braxton. All of
these works aim to expand the variability, dynamic expression, and experiential opportunities to be
had with a work. These pieces “offer themselves, not as finite works which prescribe specific
repetition along given structural coordinates, but as ‘open’ works, which are brought to their
conclusion by the performer at the same time as he experiences them on an aesthetic plane.”
(Umberto Eco, 1959)
The opposite of this trend to divest agency would be efforts of the total serialists and
advocates of new complexity. Such movements, championed by the likes of Karlheinz Stockhausen,
Brian Ferneyhough, and Pierre Boulez, aim for the concentration of agency in a single role: the
composer. Their aim to control every parameter of the music being performed manifests itself in the
form of complex notation and compositional systems, and by extensive use of electronic playback of
highly sculpted audio.
While paradigms to divest musical agency abound in the music of the mid twentieth century,
many had their roots planted centuries prior in music history. Mozart’s Musikalisches Würfelspiel
(Musical Dice Games) from 1792 gave his performers a chance to compose their own waltzes. The 
4
tradition of empowering a soloist to compose or improvise their own cadenza for a concerto gives
the performer a great deal of artistic agency. Much of medieval and renaissance literature is full of
musical games, puzzle cannons, and other works that show a proclivity to invite thinkers and
musicians to have a hand in creating the pieces they perform. These ideas around randomness, dice
throwing, and chance would get reintroduced in the geographically centered works of Hildegard
Westerkamp and the environmental listening practices of Pauline Oliveros, as they shift agency to
the environment. The practice of creating graphic scores, or otherwise indeterminate notation
mechanism is part of a trend to shift agency to the performer, reminiscent of previous traditions of
live improvisation and virtuosic showcases. The San Francisco Tape Music Center’s emphasis on
collaborative immersive events was one of the earlier broad recognitions that divested agency to
other creative forces to yield a more comprehensive and immersive multimedia experience. At their
core, all of these pieces questioned the central principle of a composer as master orchestrator, and
all worked to define movements that would later be expanded upon greatly influenced by
technological advances.
2.1 - Existing Musical Trends to Shift Agency to the Environment
The most notable composer for divesting his compositional authority to other sources is
John Cage. From his famous “silent” piece 4:33 (1952), to his Aria (1958) utilizing graphic notation,
to his Sonatas and Interludes (1946-1948) for prepared piano, most of Cage’s works encourage the
acceptance of all sounds into the folds of music. Just as Cage looked to include non-traditional
sounds in his music, so too did he search for non-traditional compositional forces. In his most wellknown work, Cage instructs the performer to sit tacit (silently, not playing) for three movements
whose total duration adds up to four minutes and thirty-three seconds. During this duration, the
sounds of the hall, the audience, and the larger environment all form the content of the piece. 
5
During performances, this often means listening to HVAC systems hum, audience members
coughing, and birds or insects outside if it is amiable weather. By making these sounds the content
of the piece, Cage decrees that the environment shall have direct agency over the musical content of
the piece.
Another artist who posits that there is great intrinsic value in the sounds of the
environmental is Pauline Oliveros. Her practice of Deep Listening aims to encourage a listener to
comprehend as much sonic information as possible from their surroundings. Her work establishes
several different forms of listening, including “focused listening”, “open, global, and receptive
listening”, “inclusive listening” and “exclusive listening”, among others (Baker, 2003) The
application of these ideas is that one can develop their listening ability by actively practicing exercises
that hone these skills. Such activities focus on listening to a whole or portion of the soundscape. As
the sounds that are present drastically change from session to session, the environment has a
monumental impact on the overall experience of the exercises.
Other more modern pieces also place an emphasis on the environment. Inuksuit (2009) by
John Luther Adams has been hailed as “the ultimate environmental piece” (Tommasini, 2012). This
work takes place spread out over a large outdoor area that the audience is invited to wander. The
performers, over the course of a full hour, play music that responds to and is emboldened by the
environment in which it sits. The piece, scored for between nine and ninety-nine percussionists, is
ultimately mediated by the environment in which the work is placed, and in doing so, Adams cedes a
great deal of musical agency to this force. Gusts of wind, birds, insects, water features, and other
people inhabiting the space all are expected contributions that the environment adds to the
composition.
Other sonic art objects that place specific emphasis on the environment include the modernday audio tour and soundwalk. Many audio tours incorporate a shift of agency to the environment 
6
and how the audience moves about within it, as they must account for anticipated aspects of the
environment in every decision they must make. For example, in Embodied Ways of Listening: Oral
History, Genocide and the Audio Tour (High, 2013), High outlines how the geography and anticipated
sonic landscape affected the design and composition of the audio tour they produced. Incorporating
aspects like anticipated traffic noise, known rest points, and other features of the geography, the
physicality of the location they were producing the work for was forefront of their mind when
producing the experience.
When divestment to the environment is pushed further, one arrives at Hildegard
Westerkamp’s practice of Soundwalking. This practice calls for the listener to curate their
environmental sounds by seeking out particular sonic experiences in their surroundings. Similar to
the ideas championed by Cage, Westerkamp’s works call for the inclusion of all sounds as music and
encourages the practitioner to move around spaces in order to curate these sounds. The pieces that
result from this practice would often appear as a short set of instructions, instructing the listener to
consider “which is the quietest sound of your body?” and then “Lead your ears away from your own
sounds and listen to the sounds nearby.” The resulting experience is one that can highly tailored to
be meditative, educational, or contemplative, but always highly dependent on the soundscape one is
inhabiting.
While the soundscape of environmental noises is certainly sufficient for music, many
composers began to question how to bring the seemingly random quality it affects into a more
traditional musical paradigm. Such a harness would allow the environment to act however it might
and allow a performer to then interpret the actions on musical instruments. Such an interface would
take the environment as input and create a musical experience as the output, with the performer
acting as the go-between to dutifully to realize the composition. John Cage once again pioneered
these interactions as he began incorporating the I-Ching as a random number generator in his 
7
compositional process, introducing chance into his Music of Changes (1951). This incorporation of
randomness was later incorporated in performance, as Cage, instead of performing the I-Ching
himself, directed his performers on how to use the device. This resulted in pieces such as Child of
Tree (1975) where the duration, form, order, and content of the piece is variable. This act of using
the I-Ching results in the environment, or random determinants, exercising its compositional agency
through the interface Cage has designed for it. It should be noted that, while the performer is
instructed on how to use the I-Ching, they do not have any more control over the result of the IChing than you would over the results of a dice roll. They simply perform the actions called for by
the instructions and score, then create the resulting piece.
Though Cage is often credited with introducing the strain of chance music that has become
aleatory in the modern musical lexicon, his work might be better classified as a reinvention. Mozart
and Haydn both beat him to the punch two centuries earlier in small sets of musical games that were
popular in Europe in the late eighteenth century. These composers designed the dice games by
writing out hundreds of pre-composed modular components, each section one measure in length.
The player would then roll dice several times to select which measures would be used in any given
performance of the piece. These light pieces were, however, not considered serious music and
instead treated as mere novelty games or jokes that would allow someone to compose the music
“without understanding anything about music or composition.” (Mozart, 1792, translated) Indeed, as
they were designed to be able to function with interchangeable parts, these pieces are algorithmic in
nature and provided blueprints of how a composer might allow for variation on a form, a concept
that would be revitalized by algorithmic composers almost two centuries later.
Another notable mid twentieth century piece that incorporates chance processes is Pierre
Boulez’s Third Sonata for Piano (1955-1957). Unlike most of Boulez’s other works, the third sonata for
piano calls for a very typical chance process: The performer is to shuffle the pages of the score, 
8
arranging them in to a random order before beginning the performance. Unlike most of Boulez’s
other works that call for very stringent rhythmic, pitch, and structural content, this piece creates a
considerable amount of variety in the results that may be achieved.
Many of these works call on actions by the performer to begin initiating the chance
processes that give rise to the variability present in these works. However, just as in Cage’s 4:33,
where the performer has no control over the environmental noises and conditions that will define
the sonic content of the music, in pieces involving shuffling paper and dice rolling, the performer
has just as little control as when they are to sit at the piano bench and wait for four and a half
minutes.
Another approach to incorporating the environment into musical compositions calls for an
entirely different approach to time, that of permanent Installation/Sculpture Art. Here, the art
object becomes part of the permanent physical and sonic landscape. Dan Corson’s Sonic Bloom
(2013) is one such playful installation that interacts purposefully with the grounds surrounding the
Pacific Science Center in Seattle, Washington. The installation takes the form of several buildingsized flowers that the participant is to walk or run through. Motion sensors detect movement in the
vicinity of the flowers and activate “blooms”, wavelike orchestral crescendos, as one passes by. Such
a piece is heavily shaped by its surrounding environment both physically and sonically, as well as in
its interface with the participants. Physically, the bulbous flowers share similar architectural features
to the Space Needle, which they silhouette against when viewed from the pedestrian path below.
The audio fits in with existing noise levels, as the bass-heavy recordings clearly project outside of
normal conversation-level frequencies. Lastly, in interface, Corson relies greatly upon his location to
provide varied demographics to form the overall audio shape. Adults who move slowly through the
sculpture activate it in a markedly different style than the younger kids who run through it while 
9
exploring the nearby Science Center. These influences combine together, the environment having a
formative impact on the sculpture, and the sculpture leaving a lasting sonic and physical impression
on the landscape.
Together, these very different musical works are united by the composers’ actions to
relinquish control of important compositional components, letting them be decided by
environmental factors instead of by the composer. Following this principle, these pieces from Cage,
Westerkamp, Corson, and others form a collection of works spanning many decades where the
composers have placed the environment, a distinctly non-human force, in control of salient
compositional aspects. The wild amount of variability involved in many of these pieces is frequently
a hallmark of these works. However, as a result, they can often appear to lack traditional musical
aesthetics. While adding layers of indirection and interface was identified as a viable approach to
begin working towards this end, a desire for a strong traditional musical results, combined with the
proclivity for composers to divest agency to other sources, lead many composers to instead divest
agency to a source that could apply extensive musical training and aesthetic principles directly to the
art.
2.2 - Existing Musical Trends to Shift Agency to the Performer
Another prominent trend among western art music composers producing “Open” works in
the middle of the twentieth century was a shift of musical agency to performers. These pieces give
large amounts of decision-making responsibility to the performer, towards various musical ends. By
inventing a multitude of less specific score notation systems, these composers enable the performers
of their works to make meaningful choices that had been slowly eroded in the performance of
traditional cannon works.
10
As the performer begins to take on a more influential role in music production, I would like
to make a distinction between the role of a performer and an interpreter. Performers are the ones to
physically produce the music at the time of performance, whereas interpreters work in advance to
decide what choices should be made for a given performance. In the case of a solo performance, the
standard practice is for the performer to execute their own interpretations of a piece of music. This
is often not the case with large ensembles, symphonies, or other groups that have a conductor or
follow the lead of an artistic director. In such cases, the leader of the group takes on the role of
primary interpreter, and the performers fill a somewhat subordinate and supportive role. Such a split
between interpreters and performers has been long recognized, as our nomenclature of “composerperformer”, “singer-songwriter”, and, in French, “Interprète”, all speak to the need to specify these
artists do something more than simply perform. In most of the repertoire surrounding the Open
Work, practitioners are active in reclaiming musical agency through more meaningful interpretive
roles. David Tutor famously would spend hours interpreting scores, obsessing over and measuring
the exact ratios between lines drawn on a page to determine the relative lengths of notes. (Ross,
2007) Similarly with large ensembles in pieces like Philip Glass’ Two Pages (1968) and Reich’s Music for
18 musicians (1974-1976), the composers find opportunities to give decision making power to the
musicians performing the pieces, sometimes with the aid of a traditional conductor, but more often
without.
The proclivity to give choice and decision making to the performer is one that was originally
the accepted norm rather than a tactic of the avant-garde tactic. John Dowland (1563 - 1626) and
William Byrd (1538 - 1623) both wrote works of this style, including puzzle canons and palindromic
motets. These works called for the performers to each read the same lines of music, but some in
unconventional ways, such as starting from different places in the score, or reading backwards from
different ends of the staff. Such works were written to challenge the mind and skills of a talented 
11
musician, and often made great mental demands of the performer well beyond simply singing the
notes on the page.
This thread was revived in the twentieth century with the emergence of several pieces that
place more extreme compositional demands on the performers of the work than simply performing
back the specified sounds. One such category of pieces that gives a large amount of agency to the
performer are those similar to Intermission 6 (1953) by Morton Feldman and Klavierstück XI (1952) by
Stockhausen. These pieces both involve giving the performer pages of music containing staffs with
musical fragments that the performer is to move between feely. (See Figure 1 for a score sample)
This has the effect of defining a color pallet or building blocks from which the composer is to
assemble a piece. Feldman worked in small fragments and did not address many overall rhythmic
concerns, leaving that as an additional parameter for the performer/interpreter to fill. Stockhausen’s
execution of this principle however worked with larger segments that included lengthy highly
defined rhythmic patterns, with instructions for tempo markings, dynamics, and articulations. By
specifying such parameters, the only variables he left “open” in this open work are the order of the
individual sections and the total duration. These open aspects still allow the work to be highly
adaptable as the performer can determine the length, form, pacing, and structure of the piece.
Forming almost a guided improvisation, these pieces can be shaped by the performer into whatever
structure is necessary. As an “Intermission”, Feldman’s piece in particular was intended to be
variable in length to fit the varying duration of an intermission1
, and could be performed by one or
two pianos, indicating that the available performing forces should be utilized. These pieces leave the
 1 Another work that is highly variable in length is Philip Glass’ Mad Rush, which was commissioned
to be played as program music before the arrival of the Dalai Lama. As the Dalai Lama’s schedule
was unknown, the work need to be of an indefinite length. (Glass, 2008)
12
performer/interpreter with a great deal of musical agency as they are enabled to dictate the length,
content, and form of the work.
Another composer that worked to expand agency for the composer was La Monte Young
who, in his short collection titled Compositions 1960, dealt with everything from authorship to
performer’s choice to open works to graphic scores. Number 7, the most famous of the set, is also
the most “traditionally” open, in that it calls upon the performer to decide several important aspects
of the work. By specifying only two notes, B and F#, and the instructions “to be held for a long
time”, Young leaves open to the performer the choices of which instruments should be played,
which shape the notes should have (if any), and perhaps most importantly, the overall length of the
pieces. Other pieces, such as Number 13, calls authorship into question and enables performer
choice, as the score simply instructs them to “...prepare any composition and then perform it as well
as he can.” (Young, 1960) Here, the performer is clearly given a much wider amount of agency to
determine the audience’s listening experience, as they can fill this void left by Number 13 with any
composition, performed at the highest skill level possible. Such a high concentration of agency in
the performer is rarely seen elsewhere, as in the work they have almost total control over what sonic
experience is given.
Young’s Compositions 1960: Number 9 is a graphic score. It contains a single line and the
instructions “the enclosed score is right side up when the line is horizontal and slightly above
center”. While Young’s work is an extreme example, such ambiguous directions and markings are
commonly seen in graphic score notation.
Anthony Braxton, on his graphic scores, explained that “one should be able to actually see as
well as hear [the piece].” These scores, often colorful, visually appealing, and only optionally
containing anything resembling traditional sheet music often work to express either the emotion,
performance style, or spectral movement of the desired sounds. One such work, Composition No. 108
13
(1984) consists entirely of waving lines meant to evoke the general shape of the music. (See Figure 2
for a score sample) More generally, pieces that utilize graphic scores often omit instructions
pertaining to overall length, structure, or instrumentation, so each realization varies drastically from
performance to performance. Such decisions, left up to the performer to realize, reflect the agency
that the composers divest when inventing and utilizing such purposefully ambiguous and versatile
notation.
While graphic scores tended to throw out most of the indications found in traditional music
scores, several elements of the variability they introduce worked their way into standard sheet music
notation. These practices all aim at expanding the amount of choice the performer has in
interpreting the piece. Among these ideas are notation tools that generally get classified under the
wide umbrella of “extended technique” and include everything from tone clusters to box notation to
open instrumentation to notated improvisational practices. As these markings became standardized,
they began to become more frequently seen in large ensemble literature.
The main tool that composer’s such as Philip Glass, Terry Riley, and Leo Brouwer employed
was the use of “Box Notation” or, under different names, indications to the performer that they are
to repeat a specific section of music until instructed or internally compelled to do otherwise. Glass’
piece Two Pages is named after such a technique, as he comments on the new notation system that
allows him to fit twenty minutes of music on to a meer two pages. Integral for this to function is the
instruction that each section is to be repeated a variable number of times. The net result is that the
performer is left up to their own devices to determine the relative lengths of sections in the piece.
Another example of this practice can be found in Leo Brouwer’s Etude XX (1983), which
calls for the guitarist to repeat in a very similar fashion an undulating drone-type pattern. He is able
to use this device to create an ethereal and unmetered atmosphere. By including box notation with
no indication of desired number of repetitions, performers who are capable of playing the patterns 
14
extremely fast may do so several more times than a beginner who may play the patterns for the same
duration, but fewer times. By utilizing this technique, Brower makes the piece instructive and
educational, as in the spirit of an Etude, yielding agency to the performer.
Riley’s infamous In C is composed of simply fifty-three fragments, arranged on the page in a
scattered manner not unlike Feldman’s scores. However, by specifying an ordering and giving
extensive directions, Riley “tames” the unordered building blocks of Feldman’s approach to instead
create a piece that is reliably between twenty and fifty minutes long and shifts from C major to G
major to F minor from start to finish. While the overall structure and length of the piece are
recommended, the intricacies of the specific number and types of instrument, the exact texture at
any given spot, the octaves each pitch is played in, and many other musical characteristics are all left
open for the performing forces to decide.
This agency given to the performer the expense of being notated on the physical score is
perhaps best scene in the works of Steve Reich and Julius Eastman. In several of their pieces,
specifically Reich’s Piano Phase (1967) and Music for 18 musicians (1976), as well as Eastman’s Stay On It
(1973), the most salient portions of the work are not notated in the score and commonly only
relayed by another who has previously performed the work.
In Piano Phase, the core effect of the piece is a phasing phenomenon that involves two
performers, initially performing the same rhythm, slowly getting out of phase with each other and
allowing one to play slightly ahead or behind. As this process continues and the pair grow more and
more out of sync, incredibly complex rhythms start appearing that are highlighted by the pianists.
For the most salient and novel aspect of the piece, the phasing, there is little notation that the
composer gives other than how to start the phase and where to finish it. (See Figure 3 for a score
sample)
15
Similarly, in Music for 18 Musicians, Reich places an even greater emphasis on the performer,
as the piece did not have, and some may argue still does not have, an adequate score to describe the
original performance practice. Notes at the beginning of the published score allude to this, as they
indicate that, for all of the early performances, the ensemble performed only with small scraps of
scores, much akin to the fragments provided in box notation, and had instructions to simply wait for
a cue from the metallophone player. (Reich, 1976) In these cases, an incredible amount of musical
decision making is left to the performer, as they take on the role of interpreter, performer, as well as,
in the case of Music for 18 Musicians, audible conductors.
This challenge is exemplified in Eastman’s Stay On It. The piece consists of several scenes in
which the ensemble alternates between group unison and a guided improvisation. The piece then
relies on performers to coordinate among themselves how to transition between playing sections of
guided improvisation and playing unified tutti passages. In such a piece, agency is shared in a
different dispersal, as the musicians are left to both improvise, as in In C, and coordinate, as in Music
for 18 Musicians. Together, the agency Eastman provides the participants with pushes them from
simply performing the work to a role that calls for very strong interpreting ability.
Eastman’s works drew extensively from the popular tradition, and the improvisation skills he
relied on his performers having often were developed in the context of a jazz education. Jazz, and to
a similar extent American Bluegrass, both have a strong tradition of improvisation permeating their
cultures. From jam-circles to the concert stage, improvised virtuosic solos are a critical part of this
music and reflect a different paradigm in distribution of musical agency. It is no surprise then that at
the intersection of Jazz and Western Art Music are many composers-performers who bring this
decidedly non-western paradigm with them when they begin to produce art music.
One such jazz-inspired practitioner of western art music is John Zorn. His most influential
work, Cobra (1984), exists as a set of rules, cue cards, and collective memory, rather than anything 
16
physical resembling a score. The piece is open instrumentation and the performers follow a
conductor who acts in the role of band leader. The improvisation practice designed for Cobra can
give rise to an enormously wide variety of resulting pieces, and there exists several ensembles who
dedicate themselves to only performing this piece. This work is as successful as it is because Zorn
divides musical agency in a very insightful manner. Zorn, as the original composer, provides only the
ruleset an a few example realizations. The implementation is then reimagined by every performing
ensemble and led by a passionate and informed band leader. This division enables performers who
are interested but not yet ready to make the education investment required of other pieces, i.e.,
learning how to interpret a graphic score, etc., to approach this improvisatory work under the
guidance of another musician who leads the learning process. Initially, they can control much of the
compositional agency as they help the new member adjust, but as the performer grows more skilled,
they are encouraged to take a larger role in the shaping of the musical form and content. One such
mechanism that explicitly enables this is the “Birthday hat” rule, in which an ensemble member may
don a conical party-hat if they intend to take an extended solo around or with the rest of the group.
Rules such as these give rise to an engaging and rewarding musical experience for the performers,
who are then empowered to create powerful music for listeners to consume.
All of these pieces examine ways that musical agency is divested from the composer to the
performer. By utilizing new written score techniques, engaging with intentional ambiguities, and
encouraging guided improvisation, these composers searched for ways to enable the performers of
their works to have a greater deal of control over numerous salient aspects of the music. While this
trend was by no means the norm, it has become the largest and most effectively integrated tradition
of the agency-distributing movements to stem from the mid twentieth century. 
17
2.3 - Existing Musical Trends to Shift Agency to Other Creatives
The current focus on musical performance as an interdisciplinary art in our modern musical
culture was most notably championed by Richard Wagner, who wrote music in aid of his search for
Gesamtkunstwerk, or a “Total Work of Art”. He asserted in 1849 that opera was the truest form of
art, as it represented a culmination of all of mankind’s efforts in the artistic realm as it incorporated
theater, poetry, dance, music, architecture, and costume, lighting, and set design. While this emphasis
on opera in modern day music circles has not yet fallen out of fashion, the concept of an immersive
form of total artwork has been appropriated by many groups since Wagner made his first
pronouncement.
The San Francisco Tape Music Center, founded in 1961 by Pauline Oliveros, pioneered
many interdisciplinary themes that would propel the opera tradition into video-opera and eventually
the multimedia work. Sharing a building with the choreographer Anna Halprin, the composers of
the San Francisco Tape Music Center were active in collaborating not just with dancers, but also
with theatres, film makers, and projection artists. Such works included The Bath (1966), a ballet
choreographed by Halprin and scored by Oliveros, and Desert Ambulance (1964) for tape, accordion,
and visuals, composed by Ramon Sender, performed by Oliveros, and with projection art by Tony
Martin. (Bernstein, 2008) These works highlight the interdisciplinary nature of the multi-media
medium, and the collaboration that took place. Such pieces do not stand on their own without all of
the components, a result of the composer divesting critical amounts of agency to other artists
working towards the same creative end.
Laurie Anderson’s Grammy winning piece Landfall (2014) additional similarly works towards
this ideal of an interdisciplinary artwork. The multimedia composition employs several creatives
working in tandem to create the immersive experience. The music for the work is scored for string
quartet, a role filled by the Kronos String Quartet, as well as a combination of Anderson’s own live 
18
electronics, voice-overs, and electric violin. In addition to these components, Anderson additionally
contributes her own projection design in tandem with the lighting designers present at the facility.
She considers the lighting design in this manner an integral part of the live experience, so much so
that in the Artist Talk-back following the premiere of the work, the individuals invited to speak
included the Kronos Quartet, herself, as well as the Texas Performing Arts’ lead lighting and sound
designers. This heightened recognition of the parties necessary to make an effective immersive
experience reflect the agency that she distributed to ensure the work is effective, immersive, and
truly interdisciplinary.
Another creative force that has an incredible amount of agency that is not often recognized
is the music teacher. The instructor has an ultimate charge to educate and guide pupils through the
standard repertoire of the instrument, and with this comes the choice of deciding what to prioritize
in such a “standard repertoire”. In doing so, they mediate the conversation between the performer
and the composer. While music for educational purposes is nearly as old as our earliest recorded
music2
, one recent development that focuses explicitly on this creative agent is the curriculum
developed by Austin Classical Guitar (ACG). In assembling works for classroom use, they found a
common need for ensemble pieces that may be performed by guitarists of drastically differing skill
levels. Having sections of optional or replacement music for less skilled performers is not a new
phenomenon, as ossia measures and optional flourishes and ornamentations have often historically
been understood to only be included only if the musician’s technical skill is up to the task. However,
the scale at which ACG has implemented these modular components makes for drastic changes in
the overall piece, yielding results that vary a great deal from performance to performance depending
on the different skill levels of the guitarists involved. This agency given to the educator serves to
 2 The “Guidonian hand”, a mnemonic device for helping teach singers, dates from medieval times.
19
recognize the purpose of the piece: not to glorify the composer, but more simply to educate and
instruct the performer.
However, not all collaborations in music necessarily divest agency. Throughout history
composers have needed to work with other participants in the music business to allow their works
to be brought into the world. Composers have worked with copyists and music publishers for as
long as the latter have been in existence. These participants, while ultimately influencing the final
product, sometimes in profound ways, often do not change the direction of musical impetus, and, as
their work is almost always verified by the composer before being exposed to the world, it is still the
composer who maintains compositional agency. I consider the work of studio technicians,
producers, and audio engineers in very a similar manner. They aim to help further the composer’s
original compositional agency rather than to introduce their own. In this way, the conventional3
relationship between composer and studio technician or music copyist is not one of divesting
agency, but rather an essential, productive, and collaborative effort to realize the composer’s
personal musical vision. As a result, these relationships are fundamentally different from the others
are discussed in this section.
2.4 - Alternatively: Existing Trends Focused On Centralizing Agency.
While there was a push among many groups towards making music more inclusive and art
generally more interdisciplinary, these were by no means uncontested assertions. Many composers
work tirelessly towards asserting total control over the art that they produced. Trends such as total
serialism indicated that there might not be much room for traditional interpretation left in music,
and within the realm of new complexity, composers placed such extraordinary demands on the
 3 While the improvisors and composers at the San Francisco Tape Music Center may be considered studio technicians,
they do not have the conventional relationship with composers that is being addressed here.
20
performers that, to the uninitiated, they seem to be attempting super-human tasks. With the advent
of machinery capable of producing and reproducing audio, the possibility to transmit directly from
composer to listener became a reality; a reality that if followed to its conclusion, could mean the end
of live music performance.
The trends that led to total serialism and continued the general stream of centralizing agency
began in earnest with twelve-tone serialism. Arnold Schoenberg is credited with inventing and
popularizing the twelve-tone process, and the Second Viennese School that rallied around him had
an outsized impact on the subsequent music in the twentieth century. The twelve-tone technique,
which involved the use of ‘rows’ of all twelve chromatic pitches, ensured there would be no clear
tonal center to the resulting music4
. (Ross, 2007) In this way, the twelve-tone system became the
algorithm to which all pitch material adhered. The performers were required to specifically adhere to
the rules set forth by the composer, and little to no variation was allowed.
As twelve-tone technique created “order” among pitches, total serialism brought such rigor
to many other parameters of music. Olivier Messiaen was the first to unite the twelve-tone system
with applicable parallels to pitch duration, articulation, and volume. The most commonly recognized
first such work, "Mode de valeurs et d'intensités" from Quatre études de rythme, or Four Rhythmic Études,
combined together these parameters in a highly controlling manner, such that every note had a
uniquely specified dynamic and articulation marking. This specificity results in pieces that place
extreme demands on the performers but leave precious little up for interpretation.
The demanding nature of these pieces is further exacerbated in the works of Brian
Ferneyhough. One of the British-American members of the “New Complexity” movement,
Ferneyhough’s works are renowned for being challenging to listen to and even more challenging to
 4 While Alban Berg utilized carefully specialized tone rows to give fleeting appearances of tonality, the vast majority of
the twelve-tone music was decidedly atonal. 
21
perform. (Whittall, 2012) By filling the score with a litany of information, articulations, descriptions,
and instructions, Ferneyhough sews complexity “...between composer and score, score and
performance, and performance and reception.” (Duncan, 2010) This work ultimately expresses a
desire for exact manipulation and control at the very edge of what humans are capable of playing.
Such exact and precise control over sonic output was, however, already achieved in the
electronic music medium many years prior. The piece Riverrun (1986) by Barry Truax makes use of
granular synthesis techniques to specify tiny and exact segments of the harmonic spectrum to
together form a larger exploration of audio sculpting. The piece includes several highly precise
spectral bands moving in counterpoint to one another, rhythmic degradations and restorations, and
choreographed pitch emergence and obstruction. Such a work would be impossible to realize with
human performers, as the demands placed on the performers would be so extraordinary as to make
the work unplayable.
The ability to precisely capture and control recorded audio additionally enabled composers
who wanted to use the sounds of the environment but without the inherent variability that works by
Westerkamp would introduce stemming from the tradition of Musique concrète. The practice of
Acoustic Ecology approaches this same source material as Soundwalking, however, as exemplified in
R. Murray Schafer’s Entrance to the Harbour (1973), exhibits a curatorial approach. While the sounds
that one hears come directly5 from the environment, they are arranged and condensed to be
presented in a decidedly composed manner. This is reflective of the goals of the World Soundscape
Project, which aims to record and preserve soundscapes to be experienced by the public, as well as
to educate communities about noise pollution and other activist driven preservation approaches.
 5 These sounds come directly from the environment after being recorded by a specifically selected microphone,
processed and mastered by an audio engineer, and then further altered through reproduction and distribution until
eventually being filtered one last time though the speakers on our playback device.
22
This desire to be action oriented and disseminatable thus precludes a Westerkamp-like approach, as
they recognize that the sound they want to present is not the same one that will always be there.
World Soundscape Project recordings are ultimately designed to evoke the soundscape they
are portraying and develop an appreciation for the soundscape in nature itself. This is at odds with
the likes of Francisco Lopez who, in his work La Selva (1998), aims to have the listener appreciate
the sounds of the jungle as independent of any other sensory experience, including visual or textual
representations of the animals or natural forces creating the sounds that are found on the record. In
the work, consisting of seventy minutes of recordings from a Caribbean rainforest, Lopez focuses
specifically on the qualities of the audio itself, and worked towards mastering the audio he captured
in highly specific ways to encourage the listener to hear what he intended to direct them to.
This trend to control, centralize, and manipulate every detail in music eventually permeated
some pieces that were previously touted as open works, retrieving agency from other entities and
giving it back to the composer. In such pieces, the original intention was to create an open form
work that could be realized with greater agency placed on the players or the environment, but in
practice became pragmatically fixed. Two such works are John Adams’ Shaker Loops (1978, 1983)
and John Cage’s William’s Mix. In the Adams’ piece, the score as it was first published called for an
open form, with each member of the ensemble repeating a short fragment, and then moving from
one to the next in a manner similar to Riley’s In C. However, Adams was not satisfied with the
realization of this piece, and later redacted the score. The re-released version from 1983 has a
specific realization of this work, as he has gone through and notated exactly which specific
entrances, exits, and phrasing he wants to occur in which specific locations. Such a traditional score
takes much of the agency and improvisatory work away from performers as they now can approach
the piece in a traditional manner.
23
A John Cage piece that met a similar fate was William’s Mix (1953). While no score was ever
redacted, the piece was notoriously challenging to produce, and comprised of 193 pages of score,
instruction, and I-Ching directions. Because of this intense investment required, it was not premiered
and recorded until 1958. Since then, due to the work necessary to reproduce the piece, the recording
has, in many instances stood in for a live rendition of the work. Such actions unfortunately ensure
that the great dynamic range of possibilities the piece can manifest are ultimately reduced to a single
concrete version. This pervasiveness of a single recording thus brings into question the spirit of the
piece, as the most common experience of a listener is not that of a performance, but rather listening
to the documentation of a performance6
. This collapse of diversity, agency, and opportunity in to a
single rendition centralizes agency into a single entity: the curator. For most works, this ends up
being the composer, who thus decides which recordings to distribute and promote, and thus selects
from among all the possibilities, a single controlled, verified, accepted, and predictable output to
stand in for the entire opportunity-space the work otherwise inhabits.
 6 It is true that this issue is not unique to experimental music. Your favorite recording of Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony
suffers from exactly the same challenges; it is documentation of a performance that, if played again, would inevitably be
different in some manner. The distinction is that the content of the piece may drastically change each time it is
performed.
24
Chapter 3. Impact of Technology
Different paradigms of compositional agency defined many of the artistic movements in the
mid twentieth century. The open work looked to performers to complete realizations, graphic scores
required interpreters, and 4:33 invited the environment into the conversation. These movements all
had at their core a dissatisfaction with the composer-centric approach of musical decision making
and aim to instead divest that agency to performers, the environment, or other artists working in
different mediums. After the widespread adoption of the personal computer and smartphone, these
practices were forced to examine their choices in the context of this new technology. These
advances led to the developments of custom instruments, context-aware mixing, and emergent
properties of the computers themselves, all expanding on divestment of agency to the performer,
environment, and other creative forces. However, the distributed nature of such computing created
a new avenue for musical agency that has only just recently begun to be explored: the divestment of
musical choice to the listener.
3.1 - Proven Technology for Composers to Divest Agency to Performers
In many works where the composer aims to divest agency to the performer, the composer
focuses on giving choices, options, and modularity to the fingertips of the performer. They are then
empowered to decide upon salient features of the piece later, either at time of realization or slightly
before. Generally, technology in these situations simply functions as an instrument, and the
traditional techniques to divest agency to performers, including box notation, score ambiguity, and
guided improvisations, may be employed. The instruments that technology enables very greatly, with
the new developments focusing on either digitizing, democratizing, and economizing existing analog
instruments, samplers, and effects, or on novel interfaces to create original invented instruments.
25
The democratization efforts focus on the recreation, distribution, and application of
previously established technologies. For example, older works such as Reich’s It's Gonna Rain (1965)
pioneered at the San Francisco Tape Music Center showed the utility and artistic merit of
technology such as looping devices, EQ, and other tape recording and modification techniques.
However, at the time of these undertakings, this technique was prohibitively expensive, such that all
innovation in this area was centered around a few institutions that housed the tape machines. More
recently, works such as Bruce Pennycook’s Interiorities utilize7 programming languages such as
Max/MSP to design loopers, granular synthesizers, EQ effects, and samplers. By implementing very
well-known effects, Pennycook enables approachability, as other performers can easily transfer
knowledge of similar physical devices to the computer interface he provides for them. Additionally,
by using familiar interfaces such as the laptop computer, industry standard Max/MSP objects, and
midi keyboards, Pennycook further reinforces the accessibility of his works. For example, a
performer that would previously have used sliders to set levels for different frequency bands in an
equalizer could now do so using a mouse on a computer screen, with little training necessary to
transfer this expertise.
More adventurous electronic instruments include those pioneered and used in the pieces like
Michel Waisvisz’s The Hands (1984), Pamela Z’s Breathing (2013) and Laetitia Sonami’s Magnetic
Memories (2016). In each of these pieces, the composer designed an entirely new interface for the
performer to interact with. While these pieces all allow for a greater variety of tailor-made expression
pallets, they also require a great deal of investment on the part of the performer. In many of these
cases, an instrument must be mastered specifically for the performance of a single piece. Whereas
 7 While this piece is listed here as an excellent example of technology specifically enabling new performance practices for
live electronic music performance, the work would fit equally well in Chapter 2.3, Existing Musical Trends to Shift
Agency to Other Creatives, as the planning and execution was done as an extended collaboration among Bruce
Pennycook, Dana Reason (Piano) and Sven Ortel, (Images/Projection). 
26
traditional instruments such as the violin or flute have years and years of repertoire for the skilled
musician to perform in return for their investment in learning the instrument, the performer who
takes up Waisvisz’s Hands, glove-like devices that report to a computer very granular gesture
recognition to generate audio, has only one short piece to perform in exchange for their training.
These two approaches of implementing traditional effects in modular ways and designing
electronic instruments come together in laptop orchestras. These groups, such as PLOrk (Princeton
Laptop Orchestra) and SLOrk (Stanford Laptop Orchestra) generally consist of between five and
twenty performers who perform electronic laptop music in an orchestral idiom. The performers
each have their instrument, which in the simplest case consists of a laptop, software, and speaker.
Just as a traditional orchestra has strings, brass, winds, and percussion, so too do many laptop
orchestras have specialized instrument groups. These differences may be physical, such as giving
subwoofers to some performers to make a specialized “basses” section, or ephemeral, such as
distributing different code to different performers to change their instruments responses.
While in function and make-up these groups may be similar, one of the key differences
between a traditional orchestra and a laptop orchestra is the possibility of control. Laptop orchestras
offer a golden key to conductors: As all the computers can be connected to a single network, a
conductor has the opportunity to correct, automate, and perfect everything that is not perfect about
a performance. However, this very quickly renders the human performer obsolete as their
performance is automated away by a conductor intent on precision. Thus, by the very act of having
human performers in the orchestra, the group makes the active decision that the results will be
imperfect, variable, and marked distinctly by the people who created it. Because of this, the very
nature of laptop orchestras encourages composers to divest musical agency to the performing
members of the group.
27
A very different model for giving agency to the performer can be found in Monte Taylor’s
piece FEMEVizcayaSC (2018). This work is for fixed media electronics without an on-stage
performer. However, the piece is designed to be re-rendered for every performance and can be
customized not only with site-specific speaker specifications and variable overall durations, but also
with different samples provided by the “performer”. This role is often filled by the curator for a
given concert. The piece originally makes use of sound samples recorded in a construction zone, but
a subsequent rendering makes use of human vocal reproductions of the original sounds. The agency
here is found split between the performer supplying the source material and the composer who
orchestrates how those given clips will be assembled and modified in to the final musical product.
Common across all of these pieces however is a unifying spirit of technology enabling the
performer to express their musical impetus and training in non-traditional ways. These
methodologies, ranging from new physical and electronic instruments to curatorial challenges, all
work together to challenge the traditional role of the performer as solely an interpreter of a work
and become more generally critical to its manifestation. Thus, as the composer divests agency to
performer, the technology available to them enables the performers to do more with every
opportunity given.
3.2 - Proven Technology for Composers to Divest Agency to the Environment
In order to adapt a single piece for use in multiple highly distinct environments, modular
components are integral to allowing the work to fit the new space it comes to inhabit. These
components allow for a composer to specify a work with many aspects still yet to be finalized. By
allowing the missing pieces to be completed later, the composer can allow the environment the
space will be filling to play a role in how the piece will ultimately be delivered. 
28
Multi-channel audio has been pervasive to electronic music since well before the technology
became widely adapted by the western art music. The first multi-channel audio system was presented
in 1881 by Clément Ader, and development in technology and promotion of standards since that
time have led to many advancements being popularized, including stereo, 5.1 surround sound, and
7.1 surround sound, among others. These formats provide the listener with multiple audio sources
so that the composer or audio producer may choose which sounds come out of which speakers. By
utilizing powerful sound-localization equations, a technician can give the illusion over a multichannel
system that a given signal is coming from a spot other than where the five or seven speakers are in
the space. Additionally, by specifying a speaker channel as a subwoofer, the sound designer
recognizes that different speaker hardware can achieve the most resounding effect if the audio
signals sent to particular machines are different to match their physical construction. Such contextsensitive mixing is a cornerstone of professional studio-quality mixing practice utilized today.
One of the most prominent examples of modularity to allow for variable remixing is the
IRCAM SPAT objects from Max/MSP’s audio specialization suite. With such a tool, the piece’s
performer8 may specify speaker layout, and the computer, when playing back the piece, will
automatically calculate the relative intensities of each sound that should be coming from each given
speaker. This enables a composer to create a single piece of music and have it interpreted through
many different environments. Other software that approaches this problem includes Panoramix, a
standalone piece of specialization software which enables a composer to spatialize a work to a
specific speaker setup or audio environment in post-production.
By performing their works through speakers and technology that differs from location to
location, many of the composers who write electronic music must contend with ceding some of this
 8 The performer in this case is often the curator who has encoded information about the speaker system in the space.
29
musical agency to the environment. Such a work played back on thirty-two speaker sound dome
would yield a drastically different experience than when performed through a pair of headphones.
3.3 - Proven Technology for Composers to Create Emergence
For as long as computers have been accessible, musicians have been utilizing them for
artistic ends. As early as the 1951 computers have been playing back melodies like “God Save the
Queen”, and the first recognized computer composed string quartet was completed in 1957. Today,
as computation has become cheap and accessible, many trends have become dominant forces in
how composers and artists utilize computers to enable music generation. Randomness and
abstraction, both concepts that predate computers, are made much more powerful in computational
settings. Their application in composition aids in the divesting of agency as these tools give rise to
emergent properties. These tools thus begin to take on a life of their own in the eyes of the listener
and performers, allowing for the computer to be a repository and source of musical truth and
decision making.
Random Number Generators (or RNGs) have been core to all computer-generated music.
In much the same manner as Mozart looked to dice to select individual measures of his miniature
waltzes, so too did Hiller look to the ILLIAC’s (Illinois Automatic Computer) RNG to choose
melodic, rhythmic, and harmonic content for the string quartet. The “computer” itself here is given
musical agency, although it chooses among the provided options in a random fashion. However,
every program utilizing true randomness is almost always constrained. Truly randomized output of a
computer (if applied directly to the Digital to Analog Converter) is white noise, and every action by
composers to limit this tempers the agency they give to the computer. The extent to which
randomness is allowed to prevail is very important, as, with too many constraints placed by the
composer, a randomized algorithm could “randomly output the C Major scale every time.” 
30
(Pinkston, 2017) The challenge of creating emergence, or the appearance of a life-like decision
maker contained within the computer, is the challenge of creating layers of abstraction between the
randomness and the final output to give the appearance of intelligent design.
One example of this is John Cage’s work HPSCHD (1969), a piece for between one and
seven live harpsichord players, and up to fifty-two computer-generated audio channels. The piece
made use of the computer’s random number generator, but instead of directly working with the
output, the randomness was abstracted in to the subprogram ICHING, which allowed Cage to apply
his I-Ching processes within the context of the computer program. This additional layer allowed for
Cage to model the computer’s use of the I-Ching in a very similar manner to his own, thus allowing
for the computer to simulate Cage’s own actions of throwing coins. As the piece calls for over
18,000 applications of the I-Ching, Cage would have had to throw 54,000 coins and record their
results to perform this piece without the computer. While many people will happily roll 32 dice for a
short waltz from Mozart, few would willingly sign up for the much larger task the computer tackles
in Cage’s work.
This process of abstraction over randomness has been further elaborated on with works
produced by David Cope’s Emi (Experiments in Musical Intelligence), where randomness is highly
constrained within the “rules” of traditional counterpoint and style. Such works rely on extensive
“Expert systems” style of coding, where at each stage of the composition, random number
generators are used to choose between certain options. The resulting pieces can thus only sound like
the options laid out by the composer, and much of the development and compositional work takes
the form limiting or expanding the opportunity-space that the computer chooses among when
making the output.
Taken to an extreme, layers of abstraction between the RNG and the actual output can be
obtusely thick. Techniques like genetic algorithms and deep-learning neural-nets make use of RNGs 
31
at many orders of magnitude greater than their counterpart expert systems, to varying results. When
applied to music, there are often so many random numbers generated that even the developers who
created the program are not able to explain how individual choices were made. Choices such as
“Why is there a ‘D’ rather than an ‘E’ on beat three”, while explainable in an expert systems model
(“the RNG chose a value greater than .9, so that means play a ‘D’.”) would be next to impossible to
answer for a genetic algorithm, as many thousands of RNG utilizations would have been made to
select that one particular note in the context of the entire program’s output. This issue of
explainability, while problematic in other applications of Artificial Intelligence9
, is a boon to the
generative-music application. Such an inability to explain plays in to the human reaction to ability to
anthropomorphize and assign intelligence to complex patterns we are unable to decipher. This gives
rise to emergence, or the perception of an intelligence force to which we can give agency in musical
decision making.
3.4 - Emergence: Applications and Conflicts
Musical applications of machines exhibiting emergence vary as much as their creators. Often,
they are treated much like the Mozart Dice Games, in which the resulting pieces of music are regarded
as oddities, non-serious music, or sources of amusement rather than serious attempts at artistic
expression. In cases where they are taken more seriously, such as George Lewis’ Voyager, they can be
allowed to shine as an equal player in the composition and creation process. Lewis’ software, written
between 1985 and 1987, is an improvising computer program that responds to the input of another
performer, thus aiming to have the same interface as another human performer. It listens to the
cumulative sound created by the group as a whole, to the other players, and to itself, when making
 9 Explainability is imperative for work surrounding medicine, judicial proceedings, self driving cars, and other
applications where human safety or wellbeing is directly impacted as a result. (Lipton, 2016)
32
decisions on what sounds to produce. The software undergoes complex decision-making processes,
which gives rise to emergence as it is given agency by the performers and composer.
However, not all applications are given the agency Lewis’ works are. The issues of curation
and collapse of opportunity-space that plagued William’s Mix once again have the opportunity to
rear their head, although at a much greater price and often with less justification. This is due to three
considerations that technology as a source of agency introduces into the mix. Trust, curation bias,
and opportunity-space size are all factors that, while present in various forms prior to the
widespread adoption of computers, become exacerbated by extreme compute power. The issue of
trust, or actual distribution of agency, is often called into question when a single output is selected to
stand in for the entire opportunity space. As an example, Huawei made a splash in media headlines
in February of 2019, by, in their own words:
…embracing the power of Artificial Intelligence to complete Schubert’s famously unfinished Symphony No. 8.
It has remained uncompleted for nearly 200 years, so we set our AI the task of finishing the most iconic and
intriguing unfinished symphonies of all.
Such bold claims would be incredibly powerful if true, as they would be in possession of a
technology capable of emergent properties as it completed the unfinished symphony in a variety of
different, interesting ways. Unfortunately, that is not the case, as closer inspection reveals that their
AI produced only melodies, and that Lucas Cantor was commissioned to complete the tasks of
melody selection, orchestration, thematic/tonal development, and generating overall form. Such a
derivation of trust certainly stands to pollute the waters and thus make it more challenging to those
who give all of those tasks to the machine to receive the recognition they deserve.
33
The first compositional task Cantor is faced with, that of melody selection, also serves to
highlight the problem of curation bias. As per the infinite monkey theorem10, with enough trials
even a randomized melody generator could generate the lyrical Schubert-ian melodies that are found
in completed movements. By not revealing many aspects of the creation process, we are left to
wonder if Cantor used the output of the program every time, or if he had to sort through hundreds
of inadequate melodies before settling on the ones that he would utilize in the final product.
The final challenge of opportunity-space size is highlighted by this task as well. If different
melodies were chosen, how different would the results have been? We have no way of knowing, as
extensive human intervention was involved. These perhaps misleading examples by Huawei serve to
limit the actual agency of the computer and the technology employed. The net result is unfortunately
a piece that is groundbreaking only in its use of a particular compositional aid, rather than in a more
grand and complete technological application.
This is in counterpoint to other composers, such as Omar Peracha, and his piece GANkyoku
(2019). His work, generated by an adversarial neural network, addresses all of these issues, as his
distribution of the work and discussion of his artistic process attest. Peracha has taken steps to build
trust in his programs by sharing his process in a presentation at the International Computer Music
Conference and addresses the issues of curation bias by acknowledging the final presented work is a
collection of three favored selections, chosen out of thirty generated output scores. Lastly, Peracha
demonstrates the opportunity-space represented by his network by showing us that the three varying
pieces are all output from the same code and parameters, thus demonstrating the decisions possible
and agency provided to the neural network. In this way, Peracha has produced a single distributable
output that still demonstrates the vitality and agency awarded to the technology involved.
 10 French mathematician Emile Borel proposed that, given enough time, monkeys randomly striking keys on a typewriter
would reproduce the complete works of Shakespeare.
34
These starkly different approaches speak to the differing amount of agency the artists are
prone to yielding to the emergent features of the technology they have at their disposal. Lewis,
Peracha, and Cantor are utilizing tools at different stages of development and utilizing them at
different positions in their artistic processes. By examining their creative process, it is clear that
Lewis and Peracha are interested in divesting meaningful amounts of agency to the emergent
technology, whereas Cantor is utilizing it as only a smaller tool in his overall compositional
framework. The technology in both of these cases has properties of emergence, but only in one is it
given agency. 
35
Chapter 4. Steps to Music Personalization
Musical literacy is a necessary prerequisite to holding an informed conversation about
musical agency. It is not surprising then that, of the traditional three parties involved in music
creation - the composer, the performer, and the listener, it is the last of these that has been least
vocal in advocating for changes to the power dynamic exhibited within the music being performed.
Every piece discussed so far has been the result of some informed contemplation or discussion as to
the role the performer should have in the production of the music. Now, however, we will begin to
look at pieces that offer to cede their structure, content, and all other salient features to the control
of the listener who consumes it. In these works, technology serves to fill the gap between the
listener’s musical knowledge or ability, and that required by the piece, thus allowing them to
converse with it on an even playing field. I argue that, unlike many of the previously discussed
categories works, these pieces require technology not only to bring the listener in to the circle, but to
be distributed and made accessible in a meaningful and economically viable fashion. Additionally, in
making necessarily unique musical experiences, new opportunities present themselves to specialize
the sonic experience at the most basic level possible.
4.1 - Music Perception
The goal of an artistic practice is often to produce a creative work that engages with the
audiences’ experiences and expectations, and then knowingly violates, challenges, or expands them
in some meaningful way. This is of course a challenge as individuals all have differing past
experiences, influences, cultural heritage, and sources to draw from when observing art. These
divergent experiences result in our individual differences in appreciation of art, and such differences
may preclude any claims towards universality in music. However, with an understanding of what
impact these differences have on our perception of music, it may be possible to create a generalized 
36
structure that would be filled and personalized so that a single piece may have the same intended
effect on multiple participants.
While it can be taken at face value that different people like different music, a greater
understanding of what drives these differences can prove useful for illuminating why a particular
song might be highly impactful and moving to one person, but completely lost on another. MasHerrero, in his paper “Individual Differences in Music Reward Experiences”, outlines a “Big 5” style
personality exam for music, which demonstrates five dimensions through which an audience
member may vary in their approach to music. The five factors - Musical Seeking, Emotion
Evocation, Mood Regulation, Social Reward, and Sensory-Motor - vary from listener to listener and
can could be used broadly to inform the sort of music to which a listener responds. For instance,
someone scoring high on “Musical Seeking” might have a powerful emotional reaction to a song
that has little resemblance to one they have heard before, but someone on the other end of the
spectrum with a similar musical background would have little appreciation for it. (Mas-Herreo, 2012)
Even with very broad strokes, these are data points may be taken into consideration when creating
personalized music to begin to shape music differently for different listeners.
Further complicating the matter are cultural differences that surround us and shape our
listening habits starting at very young ages. Stephanie M. Stalinski has shown in her work on
developmental music cognition that babies are more sensitive to wrong notes in non-native cultures
than adults. (Stalinski, 2012) This understanding, that as we learn one musical system we lose our
perceptiveness to others, additionally makes clear the proposition that in order for a composition to
be comprehended by multiple diverse listeners, the piece should be different for each listener to
accommodate the fact that they do not speak the same musical language. 
37
4.2 - Proven Technology for Composers to Divest Agency to Listeners
Most of the technologies and developments towards giving listeners musical agency have
been incredibly diverse and varied. The most successful of these take advantage of an interface that
humans are already familiar with and repurposes it to control various aspects of music. This allows
the listener to interact with a system they are familiar with and enables the listener to gain an
intuition of this new instrument and gain a “mastery” of it within a couple of seconds. While these
interfaces may be physical, as in the Gemini 6B (2019) by Mickey Delp, or Douglas Laustsen’s
installation Wires (2019), many of them are software based. Mobile phone applications, web apps,
and geographically oriented music all allow for the creators to produce and distribute audio
experiences in mass in ways physical interfaces severely limit.
Gemini 6B is an installation project by Mickey Delp that aims make “Music for the People”.
Delp, who specializes in building custom instruments and synthesizers, made use of arcade-like dials,
buttons, and joysticks in creating the installation. The input mechanisms are housed in a large sixsided arcade-like console which is stylized with the aesthetic of science fiction starship control
boards, from which the work gets its name. By using the arcade-game interactions and appearance,
Delp enabled participants to approach and be automatically invited to control the musical
experience. In a presentation on his artistic process, Delp explained how iterations on the device
aimed at improving the approachability and playability of the instrument. Such developments
introduced after user-testing included adding a “touch-reaction” concept - the idea that every user
interaction should be paired with an immediate audible change. (Delp, 2019) By taking such
measures, Delp actively works to ensure that his experiences are as approachable and interactive as
possibly.
The installation Wires by Douglas Laustsen similarly works to empower the listener to make
meaningful decisions about the audio content they experience. The piece takes the form of a musical 
38
choose-your-own-adventure book set and examines ways that humans are connected to each other
in often unnoticed ways. When the participant enters the space, Book 1 is sitting out. After starting
the audio and reading a few paragraphs, you are directed to choose between a few books to open
next. As each book is opened and activated, its sounds are added to the sonic texture. The
experience is typically under fifteen minutes in length, but content can vary greatly from one
rendition to the next. As the audio from all books that have been activated is cumulative, the result
at the end of the experience is a collection of books that are “awake”, activated, and contributing
their sounds to an overall sonic sculpture. Each participant’s final collection is unique, and this
results in each listener having a different aural experience that they personally shaped.
While these two artists work with physical media to build their interfaces for listeners to
interact with, other players have been making similar developments with software. The weav.io
mobile app is a commercial application that begins to break down the standard approach to music
distribution. This running app, which matches the tempo of the song to the pace of your running,
allows the listener to determine not only the speed of the material being played, but also the content,
as the song is rendered and mixed live as you run. This then allows the music producers to specify
different content to play when you run different speeds, and thus places the listener in a
performative role. The jogger, acting as both listener and performer, is encouraged to run at a steady
(often fast) pace, as the music rewards this behavior, not unlike applause might greet a particularly
virtuosic solo. This is one of the first widespread commercialized applications that enable divested
agency to the listener.
A more established approach for allowing listener agency over an audio experience is the use
of location as an interface. Similar to Hildegard Westerkamp’s practice of Soundwalking, these pieces
all encourage physical movement around a venue, area, or city. However, instead of appreciating the
sounds already present in these locations, these pieces provide augmenting audio components that 
39
sit over top the ambient noises. The following examples, of John D Moeller’s First Vision (2017), my
own work with Songitude, Steve Parker’s Sound Atlas (2015), and the app Detour, all explore this
interface at different scales, ranging from just a few meters to an entire city.
One of smallest of these location-sensitive works is also the only one that can be realized
without the listener providing their own mobile device. In John D. Moeller’s paper “Multichannel
Works for Nonstationary Audiences”, he outlines his artistic work First Vision. The piece makes use
of 96 tablet computers each connected to a small speaker spread out in a grid in the performance
space. Not unlike John Luther Adams’ Inuksuit, the piece is intended for stationary sound sources
and mobile audience members who, as they move, create a live mix for themselves comprised most
heavily of the sound sources near them. In this way, the listener has agency through an interface
controlling the mix of the piece. This listener-audio interface, consisting of interacting via
movement, is very natural for this scale, as the total work can be easily walked by a participant, and
all of sounds produced as part of the work attenuate naturally as you move closer or further away.
While the familiarity of these interfaces begins to be less reliable as scale increases, the same
basic intuition persists. My own work on this field, the Songitude platform, allows for composers to
construct and distribute pieces spreading out over large walkable areas by providing the augmenting
audio through the listeners’ smartphones. This is done by mapping the listener’s GPS location to a
mix of loops, effects, and other audio files. Unlike Moeller’s piece, which functioned as both a
temporary installation and a performance event, pieces on Songitude and other online platforms are
persistent through time as permanent installations and always accessible via the internet.
Furthermore, sounds are able to cover a much larger area than is possible with a multichannel setup,
as the software can map a certain audio file to be played evenly across an area several miles wide, a
physical impossibility without personal speakers. As the pieces on Songitude exist independent of an
event in the real world, they can last for as long or as short as the listener desires and can be of any 
40
order and proportion that can correspond to via a physical path. This thus gives the listener a much
larger degree of agency as they determine many parameters of the experience, from overall length to
relative structure to individual mix and content.
Steve Parker’s Sound Atlas (2019) works towards a similar concept as Songitude, but at a
much larger scale production. Parker’s works aim to be a “personalized radio station that realizes a
composition in real time, based on your GPS coordinates.” (Parker, 2019). Through a cell phone
app, the work aims to be accessible to all those who utilize the common highways in a community
and provide them with another perspective on their drives and daily commutes.
Apps like Detour and Just Ahead, while not in the art music world, commercialize the
interface of location mapped to audio experience. These applications are a medium to enable selfguided audio tours for participants, allowing listeners to explore a city at their own leisure, seeing as
much or as little of the area that is convenient for them. Such low demands placed on the listener
allows the works to be accessible to those who might otherwise not be familiar with the city or the
language, or have time constraints, or be impeded by other factors that are normally necessary
prerequisites to embarking on tours requiring a great deal of mobility.
All of the pieces examined in this section explore the role of an active user making choices in
the production their audio experience. Whether this is through arcade-like buttons, choose your own
adventure books, or moving around on a map, these pieces all give the audience an active and
participatory role in the creation of the music. This participation is most effectively achieved when
interfaces the user is already familiar with are adapted to musical ends, thus allowing a transfer of
experience and an invitation of familiarity when enabled to create their own sonic experience.
41
4.3 - Passive Personalization
Active choice for listeners is a powerful tool that enables participants to take an active and
participatory role in their musical experience. However, such works, though inviting and familiar,
still require the listener to accept the invitation and partake in the musical experience, and the pieces
often fall flat without such involvement. This challenge is one that players in industry have long
been adept at solving, but from a very different angle: ads. Google, Facebook, Amazon, and many
others have perfected the art of passive personalization and content curation. When combined with
data on individual music perception and applied to algorithmic music generators such as Amper and
AIVA, I believe the resulting personalized content has the possibility to revolutionize how we listen
to and experience music.
The most prominent of industries that thrive off of ad revenue, companies such as
Facebook, Google, and Amazon, all rely on user profiles to generate specific content based off a
myriad of data points unique to you and your interaction with the service. From basics like age and
gender, to more complex traits such as political or religious affiliations, these profiles contain most
of the salient outward-facing aspects of your personality, including your likes and dislikes, both
explicitly and as judged by how long you observe particular content. While this data is monetized by
serving you with the ad you are most statistically likely to click on, it is also routinely utilized in other
applications such as searching and ranking the content in your news feed, friend lists, and other
areas. Companies like Spotify further have much of the data necessary to determine your musical
personality, such as your inclination to be “Music Seeking” or to utilize music for “Sensory-Motor”
ends, as per Mas-Herrero’s work on individual music reward. When combined with data off of a
listener’s smart phone, the data profile expands to include location, heart rate, gait (if walking), and
when paired with a calendar application, current activity. Such large profiles should thus available for
use by an application that could utilize the parameters to passively generate custom music.
42
The industry leading algorithmic music generators are, coincidentally, also utilized primarily
by the ad industry. These tools can take in a variety of data points, such as duration, desired
mood/affectation, genre, and tempo, and can synthesize them into a unique piece of audio on the
fly without any need for post-generation manipulation or curation by a human. While intended to be
a low-cost solution for jingle-writing and unique background music for commercials, such
technology could be also be considered as more serious art music. A composer working with such a
toolbox would be able to map a huge variety of inputs about the user to an equally large number of
parameters about the resulting music.
There is little work currently to my knowledge in this field. While there are a few startups
who have developed the necessary algorithmically oriented composition components, none of them
have successfully paired their tools with datasets that enable mass automated personalized music.
Such an advance would thoroughly change society’s expectation of music, sonic environments, and
their own tailored listening experience.
43
Chapter 5. Conclusion
When John Cage declared the environment a worthy candidate as a source for compositional
truth, the music community had to contend with a new force subtly infiltrating in every work they
performed and mediating every interaction they had. The reminder that composers, performers, and
listeners all exist within an environment proved to be a powerful statement that, once made, could
not be shut out. Now, just as pervasive as the context of the environment, the power and
accessibility of computation has reared its head. A capable and mysterious repository of musical
agency, this technology serves to inform and direct every interaction among musical participants.
Personal computers, smart phones, and other sensors and speakers all began to inform, direct, and
mediate our musical experiences. These same advances allowed for musicians to examine their
divested agency paradigms, looking to new ways to empower performers, the environment, and
technology as a repository itself. Furthermore, just as Cage observed he could delay the usage of the
I-Ching to create opportunity spaces for his pieces to inhabit, so too have composers begun to
recognize the power of the mini supercomputers audiences carry around in their pockets. The highly
personal nature of technology has enabled a new force of agency to become available, that of the
empowered listener. Such an act of divestment of musical agency is currently working to enable a
new personalized music trend that, when paired with psychological underpinnings and big-data
paradigms, has an opportunity to permanently alter the expectations that listeners, performers, and
composers have of each other.
44
Figures
Figure 1 - Score sample of Feldman’s Intermission 6. Used by permission of the publisher. Notice how
order, relative dynamic, pacing, and other parameters of music are left up to the discretion of the
performer. 
45
Figure 2 - Score sample of Braxton’s Composition No. 108, courtesy of Anthony Braxton and the TriCentric Foundation. The realization of the score is left to the discretion of the performer. Braxton’s
lines and curves are meant to provide a descriptive notation of the music rather than a prescriptive
one, allowing the composer to “see” the piece in addition to hear it.
46
Figure 3 - Score sample of Reich’s Piano Phase. The phasing, the most salient aspect of the piece
from which it gets its name, is only notated as seen in between measures 2 and 3. The score contains
only verbal instructions and no direct indication of how long the phase should take, what the rate of
phase should be, if the phase should be even throughout or not, or any artistic instructions to the
performer.
“Piano Phase” By Steve Reich
© 1980 By Hendon Music, Inc. Administered By Boosey & Hawkes.
All Rights Reserved. For The Sole Use Of Brian Ellis, University of Texas at Austin.
47
Listening List
John Adams, Shaker Loops (1978, 1983) Initially distributes agency to (D.A.) performers, then
consolidated back
John Luther Adams, Inuksuit (2009) D.A. environment and listeners
Laurie Anderson, Landfall (2014) D.A. other creative forces
Austin Classical Guitar, Educational Database D.A. educators
Pierre Boulez, Third Sonata For Piano (1957) D.A. environment (shuffle pages)
Anthony Braxton, Composition No. 108 (1984) D.A. performer (graphic score)
Leo Brouwer, Etude XX (1983) D.A. performer (box notation)
John Cage
4:33 (1952) D.A. environment (“silent piece”)
Aria (1958) D.A. performer (graphic notation)
Music of Changes (1951) D.A. environment (I-Ching in composition)
Child of Tree (1975) D.A. environment (I-Ching in performance)
William's Mix (1951–1953) collapse versions into single recording
HPSCHD (1969) D.A. tech, (emergence)
Huawei, Lucas Cantor, Schubert unfinished Symphony No. 8 (2019) tech and emergent properties
relegated to compositional aid
Dan Corson, Sonic Bloom (2013) D.A. environment
David Cope, Emi (1981-2012) D.A. tech (emergence, expert systems)
Mickey Delp, Gemini 6B (2019) D.A. participants (installation, personalization, approachability)
John Dowland Puzzle Canons, palindromic motets
Julius Eastman, Stay On It (1973) D.A. ensemble
Morton Feldman, Intermission 6 (1953) D.A. performer
Philip Glass, Two Pages (1968) D.A. performer / ensemble (box notation)
Lejaren Hiller, Illiac Suite (1957) D.A. tech (emergence)
Douglas Laustsen, Wires (2019) D.A. listener (installation, personalization)
George Lewis, Voyager (1985-7) D.A. tech (as performer)
John Moeller, First Vision (2017) D.A. environment (aided by tech)
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Musikalisches Würfelspiel (Musical Dice Games) (1792) D.A. environment
Steve Parker, Sound Atlas (2015) D.A. listener (location based, tech enabled large scale)
Omar Peracha, GANkyouk (2019) D.A. tech (emergent properties, addresses ethics and proportion
of agency divested)
Bruce Pennycook, Interiorities (2018) D.A. performers with tech
Steve Reich
It's Gonna Rain (1965) D.A. performer (tech enabled)
Piano Phase (1967) D.A. performer
Music for 18 musicians (1974-6) D.A. ensemble
Terry Riley, In C (1968) D.A. ensemble
Laetitia Sonami, Magnetic Memories (2016) D.A. performer (tech enabled instruments)
Karlheinz Stockhausen, Klavierstück XI (1952) D.A. performer
Monte Taylor, FEMEVizcayaSC (2018) D.A. location and curator (tech enabled)
Barry Truax, Riverrun (1986) consolidation/ precise manipulation of exact music
Michel Waisvisz, The Hands (1984) D.A. performer, (tech enabled instruments)
Hildegrad Westerkamp, Sound Walking (essay in 1974) D.A. listener and environment
48
La Monte Young
Number 7, Compositions 1960 (1960) D.A. performer ("to be held for a long time")
Number 13 (1960) D.A. performer (Questions authorship)
Number 9 (1960) D.A. performer (graphic score)
Pamela Z, Breathing (2013) D.A. performer (tech enabled instrument)
John Zorn, Cobra (1984) D.A. ensemble (Jazz, game pieces)
49
Bibliography
Baker, A. (2003). An Interview with Pauline Oliveros. American Mavericks.
Bernstein, D. W. (2008). The San Francisco Tape Music Center: Emerging Art Forms and the
American Counterculture, 1961–1966. The San Francisco Tape Music Center: 1960s Counterculture
and the Avant-Garde, 5-41.
Chambers, I. (1994). The Audio Walk. Cox, C., & Warner, D. (Eds.), Audio Culture: Readings in
Modern Music (pp. 98-101). New York, NY: Bloomsbury.
Cox, C. (2008). Every Sound You Can Imagine: On Graphic Scores. Cox, C., & Warner, D. (Eds.),
Audio Culture: Readings in Modern Music (pp. 187-191). New York, NY: Bloomsbury.
David, E. E. (1961). The reproduction of sound. Scientific American, 205(2), 72-85.
Duncan, S. P. (2010). Re-Complexifying the Function (s) of Notation in the Music of Brian
Ferneyhough and the" New Complexity". Perspectives of New Music, 136-172.
Eco, U. (1959). The Poetics of the Open Work. Cox, C., & Warner, D. (Eds.), Audio Culture: Readings
in Modern Music. (pp. 167-175). New York, New York: Bloomsbury.
Glass, P. Concert. 13 April. 2008, Cathedral Church of Saint John the Divine, New York City.
High, S. (2013). Embodied Ways of Listening: Oral History, Genocide and the Audio
Tour. Anthropologica, 55(1), 73-85. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/24467375
Husarik, S. (1983). John Cage and Lejaren Hiller: HPSCHD, 1969. American Music, 1-21.
Ireland, D. (2017). Great Expectations? The Changing Role of Audiovisual Incongruence in
Contemporary Multimedia. Music and the Moving Image, 10(3), 21-35. Retrieved from
http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.5406/musimoviimag.10.3.0021
Lipton, Z. C. (2016). The mythos of model interpretability. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.03490.
Lobley, N. (2014). Sound Galleries: Curating the Experience of Sound and Music in and Beyond
Museums. Music in Art, 39(1-2), 243-255. Retrieved from
http://www.jstor.org/stable/90012962
Lopez, F. (1997). Profound Listening and Environmental Sound Matter. Cox, C., & Warner, D.
(Eds.), Audio Culture: Readings in Modern Music. (pp. 82-87) New York, NY: Bloomsbury.
Mas-Herrero, E., Marco-Pallares, J., Lorenzo-Seva, U., Zatorre, R., & Rodriguez-Fornells, A. (2013).
Individual Differences in Music Reward Experiences. Music Perception: An Interdisciplinary
Journal, 31(2), 118-138. doi:10.1525/mp.2013.31.2.118
Negretto, E. (2012). Expectation and Anticipation as Key Elements for the Constitution of Meaning
in Music. Teorema: Revista Internacional De Filosofía, 31(3), 149-163. Retrieved from
http://www.jstor.org/stable/43046962
Reich, S. Music for 18 Musicians. 1974-1976. London: Boosey & Hawkes, 2004. Print.
Ross, A. (2007). The rest is noise: Listening to the twentieth century. Macmillan.
Smith, L. M. (1965). An introduction to bluegrass. The Journal of American Folklore, 78(309), 245-256.
Stalinski, S. M., & Schellenberg, E. G. (2012). Music cognition: a developmental perspective. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 4(4), 485-497.
Taylor, M. (2018, December 6). Personal interview.
Varése, E. (1936-1962) The Liberation of Sound. Cox, C., & Warner, D. (Eds.), Audio Culture: 
50
Readings in Modern Music. (pp. 167-175) New York, NY: Bloomsbury.
Wagner, R. (1849). The Artwork of the Future. In R. Packer & K. Jordan (Eds.), Multimedia: From
Wagner To Virtual Reality (pp. 3-10). New York, NY: WW Norton & Company.
Westerkamp, H. (1974). Soundwalking. Sound Heritage, 3(4), 18-27.
Whittall, A. (2012). Theory, History, Analysis: Exploring Contemporary Complexity. Theory and
Practice, 241-261.
Wilson, S. (2002). Information Arts: Intersections of Art, Science, and Technology. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Zorn, J. (1994) The Game Pieces. Cox, C., & Warner, D. (Eds.), Audio Culture: Readings in Modern
Music. (pp. 196-200) New York, New York: Bloomsbury.
51
Biography
Brian Ellis is an Austin based composer, researcher, and guitarist. His musical drive lies in
using code to realize his larger compositional vision: that technology should be used toward
divesting musical agency from the composer to the environment, the performer, and ultimately, the
listener.
Brian is a Music and Computer Science Honors Undergraduate studying at the University of
Texas at Austin. He has had works premiered at numerous events, including the Ears Eyes and Feet
Concert Series, the Good House Collective's "Time Warp" Concert, the Engineering Chamber
Orchestra's Spring Showcase, as well as in numerous student concerts at the University of Texas. He
has produced works in collaboration with dancers on numerous occasions, most notably with Unset
2.0, an improvisation and audience co-collaborative dance company. As a performer, Brian is
committed to diversifying the repertoire of the Classical Guitar and has performed a solo recital
comprised exclusively of minimalist works arranged for the instrument. He performs with a wide
range of musicians under the umbrella of the Good House Collective, the New Music Ensemble he
co-founded with Christian Clark (Percussion), Nicolas Dominguez (Double Bass), and Zoe Cagan
(Flute).
As a Computer Scientist and Computational Biologist, Brian spent two years as a researcher
in Dr. Howard Ochman's Microbial Evolution Lab, which is part of the Department of Integrative
Biology. Brian's most recent publication is in the Journal Bioinformatics and discusses classifying
prokaryotic species based on gene flow.
More information may be found on his website www.brianellissound.com







and now for the source documents:
University of Cincinnati Law Review
University of Cincinnati Law Review
Volume 84 Issue 1 Article 9
April 2018
The Case for Copyrighting Monkey Selfies
The Case for Copyrighting Monkey Selfies
Jonathan Siderits
Follow this and additional works at: https://scholarship.law.uc.edu/uclr
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation
Jonathan Siderits, The Case for Copyrighting Monkey Selfies, 84 U. Cin. L. Rev. (2018)
Available at: https://scholarship.law.uc.edu/uclr/vol84/iss1/9
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by University of Cincinnati College of Law Scholarship and
Publications. It has been accepted for inclusion in University of Cincinnati Law Review by an authorized editor of
University of Cincinnati College of Law Scholarship and Publications. For more information, please contact
ronald.jones@uc.edu.
Siderits: The Case for Copyrighting Monkey Selfies
THE CASE FOR COPYRIGHTING MONKEY SELFIES
Jonathan Siderits*
I. INTRODUCTION
In 2011, British photographer David Slater traveled to an Indonesian
forest where he spent three days photographing a troop of crested black
macaques. I During one of his photo shoots, Slater set up his camera on
its tripod for the monkeys' use, and a number of photographs taken by
the monkeys were eventually shot.2 While most of these shots were out
of focus and unusable, a few were surprisingly well taken. The self-
portraits captured in these shots have since been referred to as the first
ever "monkey selfies."3 Due to the unique circumstances leading to
their creation, these photographs generated considerable publicity and
captivated a widespread Internet audience.4 The popularity of these
photographs initially was a huge financial success for Slater; he
reportedly received £2,000 from buyers in the year after the photographs
were taken.5
However, it did not take long for others to begin capitalizing on the
photographs without permission or payment. The Wikimedia
Foundation, the non-profit Internet giant that operates such staple
websites as Wikipedia, posted one of the photographs on its image
repository, Wikimedia Commons, 6 where the image was freely available
for public use.7 At one point, the photograph was even included in a
Wikipedia article about the crested black macaque species, although it
* Associate Member 2014-2015, University of Cincinnati Law Review.
1. Louise Stewart, Wikimedia Says When a Monkey Takes a Selfie, No One Owns It,
NEWSWEEK (Aug. 21, 2014, 9:31 AM), http://www.newsweek.com/lawyers-dispute-wikimedias-claims-
about-monkey-selfie-copyright-265961. The crested black macaque, or macaca nigra, is a critically
endangered species of Old World monkey that inhabits certain islands of Indonesia. Celebes Crested
Macaque, WIKIPEDIA, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Celebes-crestedmacaque (last visited Feb. 14,
2015).
2. Stewart, supra note 1.
3. Id.
4. Id.
5. Photographer 'lost £10,000' in Wikipedia monkey 'selie' row, BBC NEWS (Aug. 17, 2014),
http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-england-gloucestershire-28674167.
6. Wikimedia Commons is a collection of more than 20 million images and videos that
Wikimedia provides without cost to anyone online. David Slater's Monkey Selfe Photoshoot - the
unseen pictures, THE TELEGRAPH,
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/picturegalleries/earth/1 1021255/David-Slaters-monkey-selfie-
photoshoot-the-unseen-pictures.html?frame=3000650 (last visited Feb. 14, 2015).
7. File:Macaca nigra self-portrait (rotated and cropped).jpg, WIKIMEDIA COMMONS,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Macaca-nigra-self-portrait-(rotated-and-cropped).jpg (last
visited Feb. 14, 2015).
327
Published by University of Cincinnati College of Law Scholarship and Publications, 2018
1
University of Cincinnati Law Review, Vol. 84, Iss. 1 [2018], Art. 9
UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI LAW REVIEW
[VOL. 84
has since been removed. 8
Since petitioning the Wikimedia Foundation in January 2014 to have
the image removed, Slater has been locked in a dispute over whether he
owns the copyrights to the photographs. 9 Slater estimates that he has
lost "tens of thousands of pounds" in income as a result of Wikimedia
Commons publishing the images. 1 0 He blames Wikimedia for his lost
earnings and for destroying his business, because the organization
actively has encouraged the public to use the images without
compensating Slater by publishing his photos online and providing a
link to download a high-resolution copy. 1 1 While Slater successfully
has sold the photographs to various purchasers, Wikimedia is one of
several entities that did not purchase, or even seek a license, prior to
using the photograph. 12 Wikimedia defends its actions arguing that
because Slater did not take the pictures himself he does not hold a
copyright. 1 3 It maintains the monkeys are the true authors of the works,
and because monkeys cannot own copyrights, the photographs are in the
public domain and thus may be freely and legally used by anyone. 14
Slater has threatened legal action against unlicensed users of the
photographs, claiming: "There's a lot more to copyright than who
pushes the trigger on the camera. I set up the shot, I was behind all the
components in taking that image."' 15 In particular, Slater claims that
during his three days spent shadowing the monkeys in Indonesia, he
"became accepted as part of the troop... they touched me and groomed
me . . . so I thought they could take their own photograph."' Slater
allegedly conceived the idea to set up his camera on its tripod for the
8. See Celebes Crested Macaque, WIKIPEDIA
(WAYBACK MACHINE INTERNET ARCHIVE) (Dec. 8, 2013),
https://web.archive.org/web/20131208051727/http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Celebes CrestedMacaque.
9. Devin Coldewey, Monkey Selfie on Wikipedia Drives Photographer Bananas, NBC NEWS
(AUG. 6, 2014, 7:59PM), http://www.nbcnews.com/tech/intemet/monkey-selfie-wikipedia-drives-
photographer-bananas-n 174251.
10. THE TELEGRAPH, supra note 6.
L. Id.
12. BBC NEWS, supra note 5.
13. See Keir Simmons et al., Selfe Monkey Was 'My Assistant,' Legal-Battle Photographer
Says, NBC NEWS (AUG. 7, 2014, 7:56 AM), http://www.nbcnews.com/tech/internet/selfie-monkey-was-
my-assistant-legal-battle-photographer-says-n174781; see also Mike Masnick, Monkeys Don't Do Fair
Use; News Agency Tells Techdirt To Remove Photos, TECHDIRT,
https://www.techdirt.conarticles/20110712/01182015052/monkeys-dont-do-fair-use-news-agency-
tells-techdirt-to-remove-photos.shtml (last visited Feb. 14, 2015).
14. Id.
15. THE TELEGRAPH, supra note 6. There is some inconsistency as to whether Slater actually
engineered the shot at all, or if the monkey seized the camera while Slater was away. See, e.g.,
Masnick, supra note 12. For purposes of this article, the author will assume that Slater did in fact set up
the shot in the manner in which he has claimed.
16. BBC NEWS, supra note 5.
https://scholarship.law.uc.edu/uclr/vol84/iss1/9
2
Siderits: The Case for Copyrighting Monkey Selfies
2016]
COPYRIGHTING MONKEY SELFIES
monkeys to use after one of the monkeys spontaneously grabbed the
camera and took a few blurry shots of the surrounding forest.17 Other
steps that Slater took to facilitate the photographs included: setting up
the camera with a wide angle lens; configuring the camera's settings for
a facial close-up (e.g. predictive autofocus, motorwind, and flashgun);
framing the shot; and adjusting the exposure.' 8 By Slater's account, he
even kept one hand on the tripod while the monkeys began touching the
lens and playing with the camera and its buttons. 19 They watched their
reflections in the lens and grinned at themselves while they pressed the
shutter button, capturing the so-called monkey selfies. 20
Wikimedia has expressed its rejection of Slater's argument that he
substantively contributed to the photographs enough to warrant
copyright protection. 21 At one point, the Wikipedia page on animal-
made art-which discusses the monkey-selfie controversy-quoted
Slater as claiming he had "engineered" the shot; however, the
"engineered" text provided a hyperlink to Wikiedia's article on the
long-rejected "sweat of the brow" legal doctrine. Clearly, Wikimedia
finds Slater's position is without merit.23
This dispute has spurred controversy over whether works such as
Slater's, which blur the line between copyrightable works of human
authorship and uncopyrightable "works of nature," should be protected.
Part II of this Casenote discusses the relevant background information
needed to understand the underlying purpose of copyright protection in
the United States, as well as the requirements for obtaining a copyright.
Part II further discusses the recently released public draft of the
Copyright Office's third edition of the Compendium of U.S. Copyright
Office Practices, which clearly alludes to the Slater controversy, as well
as the Seventh Circuit's decision in a case analogous to Slater's, Kelley
17. Stewart, supra note 1; David Slater, DJS PHOTOGRAPHY,
http://www.djsphotography.co.uk/Tropical %20Forests/Sulawesi /2OMacaques.htm (last visited Feb. 14,
2015).
18. BBC NEws, supra note 5; Stewart, supra note 1; THE TELEGRAPH, supra note 6.
19. THE TELEGRAPH, supra note 6.
20. Id.
21. Stewart, supra note 1.
22. Animal-Made Art, WIKIPEDIA (WAYBACK MACHINE INTERNET ARCHIVE) (October 11,
2014), https://web.archive.org/web/20141011073012/http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Animal-madeart.
While the contents of Wikipedia pages are user-generated, the article's position was clearly consistent
with Wikimedia's.
23. See Wikimedia Foundation Transparency Report/Requests for Content Alteration &
Takedown, WIKtMEDIA,
https:/meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Wikimedia- Foundation-Transparency-Report/Requests-for_Content_
Alteration-%26_Takedown#Monkey-Selfie (last visited Feb. 14, 2015) ("We received a takedown
request from the photographer, claiming that he owned the copyright to the photographs. We didn't
agree, so we denied the request.").
Published by University of Cincinnati College of Law Scholarship and Publications, 2018
3
University of Cincinnati Law Review, Vol. 84, Iss. 1 [2018], Art. 9
UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI LAW REVIEW
[VOL. 84
v. Chicago Park District. Part III of this Casenote presents various
arguments in favor of granting Slater copyright ownership of the
photographs and criticizes the Kelley decision. Finally, Part IV of this
Casenote summarizes Slater's strongest legal arguments and concludes
that, if Slater pursued legal action against entities such as Wikimedia,
ultimately, he would prevail.
II. BACKGROUND
A. The Law Governing Copyright Protection
The United States Constitution grants Congress the power "[t]o
promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited
Times to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective
Writings and Discoveries." 24 Acting under the power granted by this
clause, also known as the "Patents and Copyrights" clause, Congress has
enacted a series of Copyright Acts establishing the United States
Copyright Office, setting forth the requirements for copyright
registration, outlining the basic rights of copyri ht owners, and detailing
the length or "lifespan" of copyright protection. Notably, registering a
work with the Copyright Office is not a prerequisite to copyrightability,
but a work must be registered before an infringement suit may be
26
brought.
To merit copyright protection, a work must be an "original work[] of
authorship fixed in [a] tangible medium of expression.' 27 Therefore, the
fundamental criteria for copyright protection are originality and fixation
in a tangible form. 28 Under the Copyright Act, a work is considered
fixed in a tangible medium when "its embodiment in a copy ... by or
under the authority of the author, is sufficiently permanent or stable to
permit it to be perceived, reproduced, or otherwise communicated for a
period of more than transitory duration." 29
The inter-related concepts of originality and authorship are less
straightforward than the fixation requirement and require an analysis of
relevant case law to be fully understood. Moreover, the potential
tension between fixation and originality must be addressed, as this
24. U.S. CONST. art. I, § 8, cl. 8.
25. The Copyright Acts have been codified in Chapter 17 of the United States Code. Currently,
the Copyright Act of 1976 is the primary basis of U.S. copyright law.
26. 17 U.S.C. § 411(a) (2008).
27. 17 U.S.C. § 102(a) (1976).
28. See, e.g., 2 WILLIAM PATRY, PATRY ON COPYRIGHT § 3:26 (quoting H.R. Rep. No. 1476,
94th Cong., 2d Sess, 51 (1976); S. Rep. No. 473, 94th Cong., Ist Sess. 50 (1975)).
29. 17 U.S.C. § 101 (2010).
https://scholarship.law.uc.edu/uclr/vol84/iss1/9
4
Siderits: The Case for Copyrighting Monkey Selfies
2016]
COPYRIGHTING MONKEY SELFIES
tension clearly is at work in the Slater controversy. Finally, copyright
law's hallmark principle that only expressions, and not ideas, are
protected also will be discussed.
1. Authorship
The term "author," despite appearing as an explicit requirement for
copyright protection in the Constitution, is not defined by statute. 30 As
interpreted by the Supreme Court, the term generally implies that the
work must, in some way, owe its origin to a person. 31 However, one
need not necessarily be the creator of a work to be an author. For
example, under the work-made-for-hire provision of the Copyright Act,
an employer or commissioning party can satisfy the authorship
requirement, even if he added no copyrightable expression to the work
at all. 32 In fact, a work need only be created in the scope of one's
employment for authorship to be granted to the employer. 33 In the case
of third party contractors, the work must be commissioned, and the
actual creator must sign an agreement that the work will be deemed a
work-made-for-hire for authorship to be granted to the commissioning
34
party.
The authorship requirement was explored by the Supreme Court in its
decision in Burrow-Giles Lithographic Co. v. Sarony.35 In Burrow-
Giles, the Court held that a photograph was entitled to copyright
protection despite the fact that it may be considered a mere mechanical
36
reproduction of some object. The Court found that a photograph is a
product of the photographer's "intellectual invention" and was produced
"entirely from his own original mental conception." 37 Therefore, the
photographer was considered the author of an original work. In making
30. See PATRY, supra note 28.
31. See, e.g., Burrow-Giles Lithographic Co. v. Sarony, 111 U.S. 53, 58 (1884).
32. 17 U.S.C. § 201(b) (1976) ("In the case of a work made for hire, the employer or other
person for whom the work was prepared is considered the author for purposes of this title, and, unless
the parties have expressly agreed otherwise in a written instrument signed by them, owns all of the
rights comprised in the copyright.").
33. Id.; see also 17 U.S.C. § 101 ("A 'work made for hire' is--(l) a work prepared by an
employee within the scope of his or her employment; or (2) a work specially ordered or commissioned
for use as a contribution to a collective work, as a part of a motion picture or other audiovisual work, as
a translation, as a supplementary work, as a compilation, as an instructional text, as a test, as answer
material for a test, or as an atlas, if the parties expressly agree in a written instrument signed by them
that the work shall be considered a work made for hire.").
34. Id.
35. See Burrow-Giles, 111 U.S. at 55.
36. Burrow-Giles, Ill U.S. at 60; see also SHL Imaging, Inc. v. Artisan House, Inc., 117 F.
Supp. 2d 301, 318 (S.D. N.Y. 2000). Photographs currently are recognized as copyrightable works
under 17 U.S.C. § 102(a)(5), which provides protection for "pictorial, graphic, and sculptural works."
37. Id.
Published by University of Cincinnati College of Law Scholarship and Publications, 2018
5
University of Cincinnati Law Review, Vol. 84, Iss. 1 [2018], Art. 9
UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI LAW REVIEW
[VOL, 84
this determination, the Court took into account the various creative and
expressive actions the photographer took in making a photograph,
including the particular posing of the subject in front of the camera, the
selection and arrangement of costumes and other accessories, and the
lighting.38 Notably, the Court construed author broadly to mean "he to
whom anything owes its origin; originator, maker." 39
Perhaps an even clearer definition of the author of a photograph came
from Brett, M.R., in Nottage v. Jackson, 4 0 which was quoted with
approval by the Court in Burrow-Giles. 4 1 Brett's opinion described an
author as "the person who effectively is as near as he can be, the cause
of the picture which is produced, that is, the person who has
superintended the arrangement, who has actually formed the picture by
puttingz ersons in position and arranging the place where the people are
to be." According to the treatise Nimmer on Copyright, the main
thrust of this statement is that the author of a photograph simply may be
regarded as "the person closest to the actual creative process."4 3 Since
Burrow-Giles, other courts have identified a number of factors to
consider when determining whether a photographer is the "author" of a
photograph. These factors include the photographer's selection of the
pose of the subject, the choice of lighting and angle, the choice of which
of the subject's expressions to capture, the choice of the lens and the
camera, and "almost any other variant involved." 44
Another landmark Supreme Court case regarding originality is Feist
Publications, Inc. v. Rural Tel. Serv. Co.45 In Feist, a telephone utility
company attempted to prevent a publisher of an area-wide telephone
directory from copying listings from the utility's white pages, alleging
that they were protected by copyright. 46
To resolve the dispute, the
Court had to analyze whether the white pages satisfied the originality
requirement for copyright protection.47 As an initial matter, the Court
considered the white pages to be a "compilation" work, meaning that the
38. Id. at 55.
39. Id. at 57-58.
40. 11 Q. B. Div. 627, an 1883 British case.
41. Burrow-Giles, 11l U.S. at 61.
42. Id. (quoting Nottage v. Jackson, 11 Q. B. Div. 627). The Burrow-Giles court also found
instructive the Nottage opinions of Lord Justice Cotton, who said that "'author' involves originating,
making, producing, as the inventive or master mind, the thing which is to be protected, whether it be a
drawing, or a painting, or a photograph," and Lord Justice Bowen, who said that "photography is to be
treated for the purposes of the act as an art, and the author is the man who really represents, creates, or
gives effect to the idea, fancy, or imagination."
43. 1-1 DAVID NIMMER, NIMMER ON COPYRIGHT § 1.06.
44. Rogers v. Koons, 960 F.2d 301, 307 (2d Cir. 1992).
45. Feist Publications, Inc. v. Rural Tel. Serv. Co., 499 U.S. 340 (1991).
46. Id. at 344.
47. Id. at 345.
https://scholarship.law.uc.edu/uclr/vol84/iss1/9
6
Siderits: The Case for Copyrighting Monkey Selfies
2016]
COPYRIGHTING MONKEY SELFIES
telephone utilit4 merely had collected a series of facts and assembled
them together.
Unfortunately for the utility company, the Court deemed that this act
alone was insufficient to constitute an original work.49 Rather, much
like Burrow-Giles, the Court in Feist interpreted original to require only
that the author did not copy the work and that the work possess "at least
some minimal degree of creativity." 50 With respect to the telephone
utility's white pages, the Court found that this low threshold had not
been satisfied, because there was nothing even remotely creative about
an obvious, alphabetical arrangement of names.5 1 Since Feist, it has
become hornbook law that an author is "the person who originates the
work by contributing at least a minimal degree of expression to its
52
creation."
In addition to these holdings, Feist also rejected the previously
employed "sweat of the brow" doctrine, wherein an author was granted
a copyright in his work by virtue of the amount of effort he had put into
fixing his creation. 53 The Feist Court found that the doctrine had
numerous flaws, such as extending copyright protection in a compilation
work beyond the author's particular selection and arrangement of the
compiled facts to the facts themselves. 54 This, the Court held,
"eschew[ed] the most fundamental axiom of copyright law-that no one
may copyright facts or ideas." 55 Therefore, the Court declared
"originality, not 'sweat of the brow,' is the touchstone of copyright
56
protection."
The Court in Feist made clear that "the requisite level of creativity is
extremely low; even a slight amount will suffice. The vast majority of
works make the grade quite easily, as they possess some creative spark,
no matter how crude, humble or obvious it might be." 57 As a result,
courts have found the minimal degree of expression requirement to be a
very low threshold. 58 In fact, even warning labels found on energy
48. Id. at 344-346.
49. Id. at 364.
50. Feist, 499 U.S. at 345.
51. Id. at 363-64.
52. PATRY, supra note 28, at § 5:3 (citing Brod v. General Pub. Group, Inc., 32 Fed. Appx. 231
(9th Cir. 2002) and Gillespie v. AST Sportswear, Inc., No. 97Civ.1911(PKL), 2001 WL 180147 (S.D.
N.Y. 2001)).
53. Feist, 499 U.S. at 352-53.
54. Id. at 353.
55. Id.
56. Id. at 359-60.
57. Id. at 345.
58. See, e.g., Gaste v. Kaiserman, 863 F.2d 1061, 1066 (2d Cir. 1988) ("a showing of virtually
any independent creativity will do"); Weissmann v. Freeman, 868 F.2d 1313, 1321 (2d Cir. 1989) ("only
an unmistakable dash of originality need be demonstrated, high standards of uniqueness in creativity are
Published by University of Cincinnati College of Law Scholarship and Publications, 2018
7
University of Cincinnati Law Review, Vol. 84, Iss. 1 [2018], Art. 9
UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI LAW REVIEW
[VOL. 84
drink bottles qualify. 59 Still, Feist recognized that a "narrow" category
of works might not meet the threshold, such as the telephone utility's
listings, where "the creative spark is utterly lacking or so trivial as to be
virtually nonexistent., 6 0
2. Originality v. Fixation
It should be emphasized that, as the Court noted in Feist, originality is
the touchstone of authorship-not fixation.6 1 The fact that the telephone
utility acquired the facts and fixed them in the tangible form of a
telephone listing was not enough to qualify the listing as an original
work of authorship. Moreover, as Nimmer on Copyright puts it, "the
originator, rather than the fixer, should be deemed the 'author. ' ' 62 This
notion seems relatively clear from the language of the Copyright Act,
which grants copyright protection to "original works of authorship fixed
in any tangible medium of expression. ' 6 The use of the passive voice
in describing the fixation requirement implies that it is not relevant who
fixed the work in a tangible medium, only that the work is fixed in a
tangible medium. Therefore, the author and the "fixer" may or may not
be the same person.
Furthermore, the Copyright Act's definition of fixation only requires
that the work be fixed "by or under the authority of the author." In
interpreting the work-for-hire provision of the Copyright Act, courts
have recognized that authorship does not always require that the author
and the fixer be the same. 65 For example, in Neri v. Monroe, the court
dispensed with"); Atari Games Corp. v. Oman, 888 F.2d 878, 882 (D.C. Cir. 1989) ("To constitute a
'work of authorship,' the material deposited with the Register must pass a 'creativity' threshold, i.e., it
must embody 'some modest amount of intellectual labor."').
59. See, e.g., Innovation Ventures, LLC v. N2G Distrib., Inc., 779 F. Supp. 2d 671, 678 (E.D.
Mich. 2011) and Stephen McJohn, Top Tens in 2011: Copyright and Trade Secret Cases, 10 NW. J.
TECH. & INTELL. PROP. 331 (Feb.
2012),http://scholarlycommons.law.northwestem.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1 170&context--njtip
("Contains about as much caffeine as a cup of coffee. Limit caffeine products to avoid nervousness,
sleeplessness, and occasionally rapid heartbeat. You may experience a Niacin Flush (hot feeling, skin
redness) that lasts a few minutes. This is caused by Niacin (Vitamin B3) increasing blood flow near the
skin.").
60. Feist, 499 U.S. at 359.
61. Id. at 347.
62. NIMMER, supra note 43, at § 1.06.
63. 17 U.S.C. § 102(a).
64. Id. § 101.
65. See, e.g., Fisher v. Klein, 1990 WL 10072477 at *2 (S.D.N.Y. June 26, 1990) ("[U]nder the
copyright law ... authorship, even with sculptors, need not be in the form of the manipulation of the
material . . . [A] sculptor ... might sit in a chair, never moving and never touching the materials,
perhaps in part because he might be paralyzed or simply because the materials might be large and heavy.
... I think it is clear without question that such participation is authorship. Such carrying out of ideas of
authorship is recognized as authorship under the copyright law even if the author never places his hand
https://scholarship.law.uc.edu/uclr/vol84/iss1/9
8
Siderits: The Case for Copyrighting Monkey Selfies
2016]
COPYRIGHTING MONKEY SELFIES
found that a glassblower who executes instructions to create a glass
sculpture cannot undermine the authorial status of a designer who
"decided what kind of glass would be created, in what shapes and
colors, attached to what armatures, and where the glass elements would
go relative to the ceiling and each other." 66 In arriving at this decision,
the court recognized that intellectual property most often is created in
stages, and that there could be features of the sculpture added by the
glassblower that he may have a copyright claim to. 67 Moreover, in
numerous instances it simply is impractical for an author to fix his work
in a tangible form. As one court explained, authors of poems, essays,
and novels can have copyrights, "even if they do not run the printing
presses or process the photographic plates necessary to fix the writings
into book form." 68 Simply put, an author of a copyrightable work does
not need to be the one who physically fixes the requisite original
69
expression.
3. Idea-Expression Dichotomy
Under the Copyright Act, copyright protection never can extend
beyond the author's creative expression to include "any idea, procedure,
process, system, method of operation, concept, principle, or
discovery." This often is referred to as the "idea-expression
dichotomy." 71 It ensures that, while authors may be entitled to protect
their creative, expressive works from being copied, the underlying ideas
on which the expression is founded cannot be taken out of the public
domain in violation of the First Amendment. 72
As explained by Register of Copyrights, Abraham Kaminstein, in a
1961 report:
Copyright does not preclude others from using the ideas
or information revealed by the author's work. It pertains
to the . . . artistic form in which the author expressed
intellectual concepts [and] enables him to prevent others
from reproducing his individual expression without his
consent. But anyone is free to create his own expression
of the same concepts, or to make practical use of them,
on the material.").
66. Neri v. Monroe, 726 F.3d 989, 992 (7th Cir. 2013).
67. Id.
68. Andrien v. S. Ocean County Chamber of Commerce, 927 F.2d 132, 135, (3d Cir. 1991).
69. See, e.g., PATRY, supra note 28, at § 5:3.
70. 17 U.S.C. § 102(b).
71. See, e.g., PATRY, supra note 28, at § 4:44.
72. See id.
Published by University of Cincinnati College of Law Scholarship and Publications, 2018
9
University of Cincinnati Law Review, Vol. 84, Iss. 1 [2018], Art. 9
UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI LAW REVIEW
[VOL. 84
as long as he does not copy the author's form of
expression.73
The prohibition on copyrighting ideas furthers the primary objective
of copyright law, which is to promote the progress of science by
encouraging others to build upon the ideas conveyed by a work without
risking infringement. 74 As the court in Feist recognized, this same
prohibition extends to facts, for the reason that facts lack authors. 75
More specifically, Feist highlighted the distinction between creation of
original expression and discovery of facts, noting that "[t]he first person
to find and report a particular fact has not created the fact; he or she has
merely discovered its existence." 76 Discoveries, like ideas, statutorily
are prohibited from receiving copyright protection, for the same reason
of encouraging progress.77
B. The U.S. Copyright Office Weighs In
In the wake of the monkey selfie controversy, the United States
Copyright Office released a public draft of the Third Edition of the
Compendium of U.S. Copyright Office Practices (Compendium 111).78
The Compendium is a manual establishing various guidelines for
obtaining a copyright and explaining the Office's practices based on the
statutory requirements and relevant case law. In an apparent response to
the controversy, the Compendium III clarifies that the Office's
prohibition on copyright protection for "works of nature" bars protection
for "a photograph taken by a monkey." 79 Other exemplary unprotected
works of nature include "a mural painted by an elephant," and
"driftwood that has been shaped and smoothed by the ocean." 8 0
To support its "human authorship" requirement and prohibition on
works of nature being copyrighted, the Copyright Office cited Burrow-
Giles and other Supreme Court precedent observing that copyright
protection extends only to "the fruits of intellectual labor" that are
"founded in the creative powers of the mind" and "original intellectual
73. REPORT OF THE REGISTER OF COPYRIGHTS ON THE GENERAL REVISION OF THE U.S.
COPYRIGHT LAW 3 (Comm. Print 1961).
74. Feist, 499 U.S. at 349-50.
75. Id. at 345 ("No author may copyright his ideas or the facts he narrates.").
76. Feist, 499 U.S. at 347.
77. See 17 U.S.C. § 102(b).
78. See COMPENDIUM OF U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE PRACTICES, Third Edition,
http://copyright.gov/comp3/ (last visited Feb. 14, 2015) [hereinafter COMPENDIUM II]. The
Compendium III is the first update since the second edition (Compendium 1I) was released in 1984.
Prior to the publication of this comment, the Compendium III went into effect on December 22, 2014.
79. Id. at § 306, § 313.2.
80. Id. at § 313.2.
https://scholarship.law.uc.edu/uclr/vol84/iss1/9
10
Siderits: The Case for Copyrighting Monkey Selfies
2016]
COPYRIGHTING MONKEY SELFIES
conceptions of the author." 81 As a result, the Copyright Office
maintains that it will refuse to register any works which it determines
were not created by a human being. 82 The Copyright Office's logic in
reaching this conclusion is not entirely clear, as the cited cases do not
explicitly mention the word "human" or mandate any sort of human
authorship requirement. Regardless of its reasoning, the Copyright
Office ignores a work's potential to be created in part by nature while
still being an original conception of an author, the fruit of his intellectual
labor, and founded in the creative powers of his mind. The Copyright
Office's strict interpretation of the case law therefore would leave the
human participants of such works completely vulnerable to copiers.
C. Kelley v. Chicago Park District
In Kelley v. Chicago Park District, the Seventh Circuit held that an
artist's wildflower garden was not protectable by copyright because,
although original, the garden "lack[ed] the kind of authorship and stable
fixation normally required to support copyright." 83 Fixation issues
aside, the gardener-artist failed to satisfy the authorship requirement. 84
The court found that Aardens categorically are "planted and cultivated,"
rather than authored. Moreover, the court announced that "authorship
is an entirely human endeavor," quoting a passage on authorship from
the well-known treatise, Patry on Copyrights.86 In making this
statement, the court also looked to the U.S. Copyright Office,
Compendium II: Copyright Office Practices § 503.03 (Compendium II)
for the proposition that "a work must be the product of human
authorship" and not the forces of nature. 87
In its analysis, the Kelley court posited that a garden "owes most of its
form and appearance to natural forces," because the majority of things
found in a garden originate in nature and not in the mind of the
gardener.88 Specifically, the court was referring to the "colors, shapes,
textures, and scents of the plants" in the garden; it did not consider the
selection and arrangement of the plants or the overall configuration of
the garden itself to be the garden's more prominent features.
81. Id. at § 306 (quoting Trade-Mark Cases, 100 U.S. 82, 94 (1879) and Burrow-Giles
Lithographic Co. v. Sarony, I1I U.S. 53, 58 (1884)).
82. Id. at § 313.2.
83. Kelley v. Chicago Park Dist., 635 F.3d 290, 303-04 (7th Cir. 2011).
84. Id.
85. Id. at 304.
86. Id. (quoting PATRY § 3.19).
87. Id. (quoting U.S. Copyright Office, Compendium II: Copyright Office Practices § 503.03).
88. Kelley, 635 F.3d at 304.
89. Id.
Published by University of Cincinnati College of Law Scholarship and Publications, 2018
11
University of Cincinnati Law Review, Vol. 84, Iss. 1 [2018], Art. 9
UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI LAW REVIEW
[VOL. 84
The artist filed a petition for writ of certiorari to the Supreme Court,
but it was denied. 90 However, the artist made a number of compelling
arguments in his petition. For example, the petition noted the
incongruity of the Seventh Circuit's finding that the garden was an
original work by the artist, while nevertheless concluding that it lacked
the requisite "kind" of authorship simply because it incorporated living
elements. 9 1 The petition further mentioned that there is no legal support
for a "correct" or "incorrect" kind of authorship test, noting that the
treatise cited by the court merely stands for "the unexceptional position
that materials produced solely by nature, by plants, or by animals are not
copyrightable . . . not that authorship requires every single element of a
work to have been created by the author (and not by nature). ,,92
To
bolster its position, the artist also identified a number of floral, fruit, and
sand sculptures that have been afforded copyright protection as evidence
that works that incorporate natural elements are not barred categorically
from copyright.93 Ultimately, however, the Supreme Court declined to
94
hear the case.
III. DIscussIoN
Slater has a number of strong arguments that he could advance to
prove that he owns a valid copyright in the monkey selfies. For
example, he can argue that he qualifies as the author of the works under
both the Burrow-Giles and Feist tests. Moreover, he can argue against
the Kelley court's finding that authorship must be "an entirely human
endeavor" and show that both he and the monkeys contributed to the
creation of the photographs. Finally, Slater can argue that his
photographs, and other "quasi-" works of nature, should be entitled to
copyright protection as a matter of policy and should not be
categorically denied protection in the way that true works of nature are.
A. Authorship Analysis
Harkening back to Burrow-Giles, the question of authorship turns on
whether the work owes its origin to anyone. It is, in a way, a "but for"
analysis. In Burrow-Giles, but for the photographer's particular
arrangements and selections, the resulting photograph would not have
90. Kelley v. Chicago Park Dist., 132 S. Ct. 380 (2011).
91. Petition for Writ of Certiorari at 12-13, Kelley v. Chicago Park Dist., 132 S. Ct. 380 (2011)
(No. 11-101), 2011 WL 3099722.
92. Id. at 18 (emphasis in original).
93. Id. at 20-21.
94. Kelley, 132 S. Ct. at 380.
https://scholarship.law.uc.edu/uclr/vol84/iss1/9
12
Siderits: The Case for Copyrighting Monkey Selfies
2016]
COPYRIGHTING MONKEY SELFIES
come into existence. 95 Accordingly, the photograph owed its origin to
the photographer. In the case of the monkey selfies, the photographs
owe their origins to the two players involved: the monkey and David
Slater. Obviously, certain aspects of the photographs were subject
simply to the monkey's positioning. However, the photographs clearly
owe their origin to Slater, as well. But for Slater's creative decision to
place his camera on a tripod for use by the monkeys, the photographs
would never have come into being.
In addition, Slater made a number of other creative contributions to
the photographs: the type of lens used, the type of film used, the type of
camera used, the camera's configuration settings, the film exposure, and
the framing of the shots with the backdrop of the Indonesian forest.
These contributions are much like the factors that have been identified
by courts as relevant in determining whether a person is the author of a
photograph, such as the choice of lighting and other similar variants.
Therefore, based on the definition of authorship espoused in Burrow-
Giles, Slater's photographs should be granted copyright protection.
Moreover, similar to the authorship at issue in Nottage, Slater was the
"cause" of the monkey selfie produced and certainly the person closest
to the actual creative process.
Slater's photographs also pass muster under Feist, which looks to
whether Slater truly originated the works by contributing at least a
minimal degree of expression to their creation. As previously stated,
this is a very low threshold that most works easily pass. Obviously,
Slater's creative input was essential to the creation of the photograph.
Monkeys do not purchase cameras, select and insert a particular type of
film into those cameras, bring the cameras back to their natural habitat,
and arrange a photo shoot. Rather, these were all steps that Slater took,
exclusively. In addition, at least some minimal degree of expression
permeates each of the steps Slater took toward the creation of the
photographs. Therefore, the photographs satisfy the low threshold set
by Feist.
This is not to say that the defunct "sweat of the brow" doctrine
secretly is at work here. This is not a case of a would-be author going to
great lengths to compile various facts, ideas or works that already exist
into a predictable arrangement that lacks any degree of expression or
creativity. Rather, Slater clearly contributed at least a minimal-and,
arguably, a very large--degree of expression to the monkey's
photographs, as evidenced in part by the rare nature of his actions and
the lack of similar works. Granting copyright protection to Slater's
photographs would not prohibit others from copying his technique, or
95. See generally Burrow-Giles Lithographic Co. v. Sarony, 111 U.S. 53 (1884).
Published by University of Cincinnati College of Law Scholarship and Publications, 2018
13
University of Cincinnati Law Review, Vol. 84, Iss. 1 [2018], Art. 9
UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI LAW REVIEW
[VOL. 84
the "idea" of orchestrating the act of a monkey taking a picture of itself.
Rather, only those who copy the actual photographs that he engineered
would be liable for infringement.
B. Authorship Not Required to be an "Entirely" Human Endeavor
The Kelley court and, indeed, Patry on Copyrights, misrepresent the
human authorship requirement as stated in the Compendium II. To be
clear, the Kelley court took the statement "authorship is an entirely
human endeavor" directly from Patry. 9 6 However, the authorities cited
by Patry fail to fully support this proposition. For example, Patry cites
the Compendium II § 202.02(b). 7 However, this section's full text
reads: "[t]he term 'authorship' implies that, for a work to be
copyrightable, it must owe its origin to a human being. Materials
produced solely by nature, by plants, or by animals are not
copyrightable." 98 The Compendium II does not prohibit copyright
protection for a work produced "jointly" by nature and a human author,
thereby owing its origin to both. In fact, it is silent on this issue. The
drafters of the Compendium II easily could have left out the word
"solely," or adopted language as broad as that used by Patry, but they
did not. Therefore, the Compendium II creates no "entirely human
endeavor" requirement, but, rather, it leaves room for copyright
protection for works owing their origin to both nature and a human
author.
Furthermore, § 503.03(a) of the Compendium II, also cited by Patry,
more precisely states "a work owing its form to the forces of nature and
lacking human authorship is not registrable." 99 Under the canons of
statutory construction, every word of this section must be given effect.
It should be recognized that the Compendium II does not read "a work
owing its form to the forces of nature and 'thereby' lacking human
authorship." Rather, it leaves wide open the possibility that a work may
owe its form to the forces of nature while also having human authorship.
Clearly, if a work owing its form to the forces of nature automatically
implies that the work also lacks human authorship, the above italicized
portion is redundant. There must be some circumstances in which a
work may owe its form to nature and also involve some form of human
authorship. The monkey selfies are precisely such a situation.
96. Kelley, 635 F.3d at 304 (quoting PATRY § 3.19).
97. PATRY, supra note 28, at § 3.19 n. 1.
98. COMPENDIUM OF COPYRIGHT OFFICE PRACTICES, Second Edition,
http://www.copyrightcompendium.com/ (last visited Feb. 14, 2015) (emphasis added) [hereinafter
CoMPENDIr IT].
99. Id. (emphasis added).
https://scholarship.law.uc.edu/uclr/vol84/iss1/9
14
Siderits: The Case for Copyrighting Monkey Selfies
2016]
COPYRIGHTING MONKEY SELFIES
An analogy may be drawn between works owing their form to both
nature and human authorship and works created by mechanical
processes or random selection. The Compendium II prohibits copyright
protection for such works produced "without any contribution by a
human author," impliedly permitting protection for works created by
mechanical processes with human contribution. 100 Indeed, a vast
number of protected works, such as books, are created by mechanical
processes, but are copyrightable because their creation requires some
degree of human contribution. The remaining sources cited by Patry all
involve claims to copyright in works produced by "otherworldly
figures,"' 0 '1 and even there, Patty concedes that human beings who
"materially contribute" to the structure, arrangement, and organization
may provide the necessary creativity to qualify as authors with respect
to those aspects. 10 2 The common thread among these prohibitions is
that a human author must contribute to a work for the work to be
protected by copyright; the work need not be an entirely human
endeavor.
In addition to the fallacies in Patty's reasoning, the gardens in Kelley
are distinguishable from Slater's photographs. A primary concern of the
Kelley court was that gardens "are planted and cultivated," such that
they owe their form and appearance to "natural forces."' 1 03 Breaking
down the "natural forces" to which the Kelley garden owed its form and
appearance, the court was referring to those forces that impact the
"form, growth and appearance" of the individual seeds or seedlings,
such as sunlight, water, weather, soil, and the natural qualities of the
seeds or seedlings themselves. 104 However, the monkey selfie does not
owe its form and appearance to such natural forces. Rather, the
photograph owes its origin to the contributions of both the monkey and
Slater. While the monkey ultimately may have been responsible for
facing the camera lens and pressing the button, Slater facilitated the
photo shoot by selecting the camera and the type of film, loading the
film into the camera, and processing the photographs. Most of "what we
see and experience" when looking at the monkey selfies originated with
100. Id.
101. PATRY, supra note 28, at § 3:19 (citing Michael Foundation, Inc. v. Urantia Foundation, 61
Fed. Appx. 538 (10th Cir. 2003); Urantia Foundation v. Maaherra, 114 F.3d 955 (9th Cir. 1997);
Penguin Books U.S.A., Inc. v. New Christian Church of Full Endeavor, Ltd., No. 96 CIV.4126(RWS),
2000 WL 1028634 (S.D. N.Y. July 25, 2000), vacated by 2004 WL 906301 (S.D. N.Y. 2004); Garman
v. Sterling Pub. Co., Inc., No. C-91-0882 SBA (ENE), 1992 WL 12561293 (N.D. Cal. Nov. 5, 1992);
Urantia Foundation v. Burton, No. K 75-255 CA 4, 1980 WL 1176 (W.D. Mich. Aug. 27, 1980)).
102. PATRY, supra note 28, at § 3:19 (citing Urantia Foundation v. Maaherra, 114 F.3d 955, 958
(9th Cir. 1997)).
103. See Kelley v. Chicago Park Dist., 635 F.3d 290, 304 (7th Cir. 2011).
104. Id.
Published by University of Cincinnati College of Law Scholarship and Publications, 2018
15
University of Cincinnati Law Review, Vol. 84, Iss. 1 [2018], Art. 9
UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI LAW REVIEW
(VOL. 84
Slater, not with some random force of nature.
C. Animal-Generated Art
Monkey selfies may be categorized broadly as a product of "animal-
generated" art. This type of art is quite popular, particularly with
respect to paintings made by various animals, oftentimes in zoos. 1 05
Some of these works have been known to command thousands of dollars
when sold.' 0 6 Usually, trained animals that follow a painting routine,
taught to them by their human instructors, create these works. 107 In
Slater's case, he has characterized the monkey as his "assistant."' 1 0 8
There is no reason why such animal-generated art should be treated any
differently than analogous machine-generated art, where a machine
under human instruction manufactures a work. Such works
unquestionably are covered by copyright protection so long as the
requisite degree of expression is met. The monkey, like a printing press
or even the camera it used, is simply a part of the process Slater used to
create the photographs. After all, originality-not fixation-is the
touchstone of authorship. The medium and tools used by an author in
creating a work are completely irrelevant to the copyrightability
analysis. 109 Therefore, it should not matter whether Slater employed the
use of a monkey in the creation of the photographs any more than it
matters that he used a camera to take the photographs.
Furthermore, photography triggered by animals has been copyrighted
in the past. For example, Steve Winter, a National Geographic
photographer and 2008 Wildlife Photographer of the Year, used motion
sensor triggered cameras that automatically released the shutter to
capture his now-famous nighttime photo of a snow leopard in the
Himalayas. 110 Slater even has pointed this out to news outlets, asking if
Wikipedia also will "steal that image off National Geographic or Steve
Winter, [and] put it [into the] public domain?"' 11 At least in Slater's
case, the monkey snapped the photographs "under [his] authority," as
required by statute.
105. See, e.g., Aaron Sankin, Monkeys can't own selfiesbut what about paintings?, THE DAILY
DOT (Aug. 6, 2014, 4:05 PM), http://www.dailydot.com/politics/animal-artists-copyright/.
106. See id.
107. See id.
108. See Simmons, supra note 13.
109. See H.R. REP. 101-514, H.R. REP. No. 514 (101st Cong., 2nd Sess.), reprinted in 1990
U.S.C.C.A.N. 6915, 6921 (stating, "[a]rtists may work in a variety of media, and use any number of
materials in creating their works. Therefore, whether a particular work falls within the definition should
not depend on the medium or materials used.").
110. Stewart, supra note 1; see also U.S. Copyright Registration No. VAOOO 1823545.
111. Id.
https://scholarship.law.uc.edu/uclr/vol84/iss1/9
16
Siderits: The Case for Copyrighting Monkey Selfies
2016]
COPYRIGHTING MONKEY SELFIES
D. Policy Reasons Support Granting Copyrights to the Monkey Selfies
Copyright law best would be served if a distinction were made
between true works of nature and what may be considered partial or
quasi-works of nature. True works of nature are those that exist without
human involvement of any kind; they are works that nature has
singlehandedly and independently produced. Quasi-works of nature, on
the other hand, are those that are the result of the combined efforts of
both a human author and a natural force. These works may be, for
example, a manipulation of a natural thing by a human. Moreover, these
quasi-works of nature should be copyrightable so long as the human
author has satisfied the minimal degree of creativity requirement.
Drawing this distinction between uncopyrightable true works of nature
and copyrightable quasi-works of nature would serve the public interest
and would comport with the policies and goals of copyright law in the
United States.
As explicitly set forth in the United States Constitution, copyright law
serves to promote the progress of science. 112 It seeks to accomplish this
goal by offering an incentive to authors in the form of an exclusive right
to their works, such that an author may exclude others from copying his
original work. Absent such protection from copiers, the drafters of the
Constitution feared that would-be authors might decline to create works,
and scientific progress would be stifled. After all, there is less
motivation to create a work if the ability to achieve recognition or
financial benefit is undermined by others who freely duplicate and leech
off of the work's success. For this reason, copyright protection is
considered vital to encouraging authors to create original works.
In light of this, the reasoning behind the prohibition of copyright
protection for works of nature is simple: there is no way to encourage
the creation of a work that already exists in nature. Nature will produce
its own works regardless of the state of copyright law. Therefore, the
driftwood shaped by the ocean and the cut marks or defects found in a
stone will come into being regardless of any copyright protections. This
simply is not so in the case of the monkey selfie. Monkeys do not
naturally photograph themselves, and monkey selfies are not "works of
nature" in the traditional sense that nature will produce them on its own.
Rather, they are works incorporating both characteristics of nature and
human creativity-quasi-works of nature-and their existence depends
at least partially on whether copyright law will protect them.
The reasoning behind the Copyright Office's prohibition on copyright
protection for works of nature is analogous to its prohibition on
112. U.S. CONST. art. 1, § 8, cl. 8.
Published by University of Cincinnati College of Law Scholarship and Publications, 2018
17
University of Cincinnati Law Review, Vol. 84, Iss. 1 [2018], Art. 9
UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI LAW REVIEW
[VOL. 84
copyright protection for facts: nature's creations, like facts, may be
discovered, but they cannot be "authored." However, use of facts in an
expressive form can warrant copyright protection, and, similarly, use of
a creation of nature in an expressive form also should warrant
protection. For example, in Slater's case, his utilization of a monkey to
create an original work with the requisite degree of expression on his
part should warrant protection.
Granting copyright protection to quasi-works of nature would further
the goal of copyright law to promote progress by ensuring that these
kinds of works are created. While driftwood shaped by the ocean may
be created whether it is cast into the sea by an avalanche or by an artist
seeking new ways to express himself, one thing is certain: monkeys do
not own cameras and are not taking selfies on their own. Without some
level of human involvement, these works would not exist. And without
copyright protection, Slater's monkey selfies, elephant paintings, and
other similar works are left vulnerable to copying without compensating
the human artists who facilitated their creation. If the language of the
Compendium III draft is adopted as it stands, it is unlikely that a
photographer would follow Slater's lead and allow his camera to be
used by a wild animal. The risks involved surely are not worth the end
result of producing a variety of incredible photographs that the
photographer can assert no ownership rights over. It is likely that
similar works may never again be produced.
It might be said that Slater's monkey selfies are unimportant, lack any
significant value, and do not really serve to further the constitutional
goal of copyright law, such that prohibiting monkey selfies them from
receiving copyright protection and risking that similar works might not
be created is of little or no consequence. After all, monkey selfies are
not usually the kind of works that come to mind when considering the
promotion of "science and [the] useful arts."113 However, in addition to
monkey selfies being a source of amusement for the Internet masses,
these photographs may reveal interesting behavioral habits of the
particular monkey or perhaps its entire species.
It further may be said that such works are less deserving of copyright
protection than works that relate to the advancement of science, but such
statements would be legally unfounded. It is axiomatic that copyright
law does not consider the artistic merit of a work when determining its
copyrightability. 11 4 Neither the Copyright Office nor the courts are
113. Id.
114. See, e.g., Bleistein v. Donaldson Lithographing Co., 188 U.S. 239, 251 (1903) ("It would be
a dangerous undertaking for persons trained only to the law to constitute themselves final judges of the
worth of pictorial illustrations... [lUf they command the interest of any public, they have a commercial
value-it would be bold to say that they have not an aesthetic and educational value-and the taste of
https://scholarship.law.uc.edu/uclr/vol84/iss1/9
18
Siderits: The Case for Copyrighting Monkey Selfies
2016]
COPYRIGHTING MONKEY SELFIES
permitted to insert into the analysis their own subjective opinions on
what art is valuable and what art, in their view, is not important enough
to warrant copyright protection. "1 5 Rather, as set out in Feist, the work
must possess only some minimal degree of creative expression. What
that expression is "worth" is irrelevant. Moreover, the ability of the
monkey selfies and other animal-generated art to sell for large sums of
money implies that these kinds of works are valuable. 116
Looking to other kinds of works protected by copyright, it is even
more obvious that Slater's monkey selfies should be copyrightable. For
example, a category of works referred to as "works based on nature" has
widely been recognized as being subject to copyright protection. 117 In
general, these works refer to photographs, paintings, sculptures, or
videos of natural subjects such as animals, trees, or anything else that is
naturally occurring. Because protecting these works under copyright
law led to some confusion over which aspects of the work the artists had
exclusive rights to, the Supreme Court clarified that the author only has
exclusive rights to his work. The result is that "anyone may go back to
the same source in nature and create a second work with the same
theme. One is forbidden only from outright copying of the previous
artist's version." 118
Slater's monkey selfies are analogous to works based on animals. In
particular, wildlife photographers are deemed to contribute the requisite
degree of expression despite the fact that they do not contribute to an
animal subject's pose. 1 Moreover, producers of wildlife
documentaries unquestionably own copyrights over their film footage,
despite having little, if any control, over the movements of their
120
subjects. How can a photographer, who coaxes an animal subject into
taking a photograph of itself, be said to have given less creative input
into his work than a cameraman who merely captures the natural
movements of an animal subject on film?
This leads to another interesting hypothetical: if Slater had set his
camera to record video and began recording prior to giving the monkey
any public is not to be treated with contempt. It is an ultimate fact for the moment, whatever may be our
hopes for a change. That these pictures had their worth and their success is sufficiently shown by the
desire to reproduce them without regard to the plaintiff's rights.").
115. PATRY, supra note 28, at § 3:36.
116. See Bleistein, 188 U.S. at 251.
117. In Bleistein, the Court rejected the argument that paintings or engravings were not
protectable because they are based on natural subjects. Id. at 249.
118. PATRY, supra note 28, at § 3:38:50.
119. See, e.g., U.S. Copyright Registration No. VA0001823545.
120. See, e.g., U.S. Copyright Document No. V3481D096 (titled "American bison: the return of
the buffalo; education documentary television program / Produced by National Wildlife Productions,
Inc.").
Published by University of Cincinnati College of Law Scholarship and Publications, 2018
19
University of Cincinnati Law Review, Vol. 84, Iss. 1 [2018], Art. 9
UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI LAW REVIEW
[VOL. 84
the camera, he almost certainly would own a valid copyright in the
entire video, including the resulting still shots of the monkey facing the
camera. If the difference between Slater having a copyright and having
no copyright rests on the camera setting and who pulled the trigger, then
fixation is being wrongly applied as the controlling factor. As
previously stated, who fixed the expression does not matter; it only
matters that the expression is fixed in a tangible form, under the author's
authority. 121
Considering jointly authored works, where two authors contribute
requisite degrees of expression to a single work, 1 22 makes it more
obvious that copyright protection should be granted to Slater's
photographs. After all, how can it be that when two competing interests
exist between joint human authors, each receives a copyright over the
entire work as a whole, but when the work owes its existence to the
combined efforts of nature and an independent human author, no
copyright is granted over the work? The only valid interest in the latter
case belongs to a human author, and no other party has grounds for a
competing interest against his.
When no other competing interest exists, the "default" competing
interest is usually that of the general public, which would lose
unrestricted access to a work by granting a copyright to its human
author. In this case however, the general public has not lost anything
from the public domain because nothing is being taken away from them.
Granting a copyright to Slater leads to the same result as granting any
other author a copyright in their work: the ability to exclude the rest of
the world from copying that work. The public is not harmed by a
copyright that excludes them from copying a work that did not exist
prior to the author's creation.
Removing monkey selfies from the public domain and giving
exclusive rights to the photographer who facilitated their very existence
is not analogous to the injustice that would result from granting a
copyright in a particular rock, tree, or plant, which the public would
have been previously free to replicate. The public would be forbidden
from outright copying of Slater's monkey selfies, but no one would be
enjoined from returning to the same Indonesian forest, finding the same
monkey, and inducing it to take similar photographs. Hence, the public
does not lose anything that it previously had access to.
Granting copyright protection to these quasi-works of nature also
would serve to encourage honesty among artists. Slater himself has
pointed out that if he had lied and simply claimed he took the
121. See, e.g., PATRY, supra note 28, at § 5:3.
122. See 17 U.S.C. § 101 (2010).
https://scholarship.law.uc.edu/uclr/vol84/iss1/9
20
Siderits: The Case for Copyrighting Monkey Selfies
2016]
COPYRIGHTING MONKEY SELFIES
photographs himself, he "would potentially be a lot richer," because no
one would question the validity of his copyright. 1' Additionally, it is
unlikely that anyone could prove that he did not take the photographs
himself. While such dishonesty may have detracted from some of the
value of the photographs-after all, part of the appeal is that they are
"selfies"-Slater likely would have reaped significant financial gains if
he held a copyright on the photos, because the photos are clear, close-up
shots of a rare and critically endangered species of monkey that is
difficult to photograph. Allowing copyright registration for quasi-works
of nature would encourage those who have collaborated with some force
of nature in the creation of a work to openly acknowledge nature's
involvement, rather than dishonestly claim sole authorship.
Finally, many registered works already owe their existence to both a
human author and a force of nature. For example, nearly any sculpture
carved from wood or formed from clay might be considered a quasi-
work of nature and, yet, such works are already unquestionably
copyrightable.12 Even a floral arrangement may be registered for
copyright protection.125 More analogous to Slater's monkey selfies is
the previously mentioned snow leopard photograph. 126 In light of all of
these arguments, it would be helpful for both would-be authors and
would-be copyright infringers if either the courts or the Copyright
Office were to clearly distinguish between uncopyrightable true works
of nature and copyrightable quasi-works of nature. In denying certiorari
to the artist in Kelley, the Supreme Court missed an opportunity to draw
a distinction between true works of nature that are not subject to
copyright protection, and works that are a product of the combined
efforts of nature and human creativity.
123. Abby Phillip, lf a monkey takes a selfie in the forest, who owns the copyright? No one, says
Wikimedia, WASH. POST (Aug. 6, 2014), http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-
intersect/wp/2014/08/06/if-a-monkey-takes-a-selfie-in-the-forest-who-owns-the-copyright-no-one-says-
wikimedia/.
124. See, e.g., U.S. Copyright Registration No. VAu000309326 (titled "Horse") (carved wood
sculpture); Registration No. VAu000434894 (entitled "Cougar lady") (wood carved violin); Registration
No. VA000309328 (entitled "Possum") (carved wood sculpture); Registration No. VAu000352281
(titled "Bear family") (clay sculpture).
125. See, e.g., U.S. Copyright Registration No. VAu000398457 (titled "Seashell wreath with
flower decoration"); Registration No. VAu000028223 (titled "Country classic bouquet") (dried floral
arrangement); Registration No. VAu000028224 (titled "Golden harvest bouquet") (dried floral
arrangement).
126. Winters' photograph of the snow leopard is registered as U.S. Copyright Registration No.
VA0001823545.
Published by University of Cincinnati College of Law Scholarship and Publications, 2018
21
University of Cincinnati Law Review, Vol. 84, Iss. 1 [2018], Art. 9
UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI LAW REVIEW
[VOL. 84
IV. CONCLUSION
In the ever-expanding field of copyright law, there is plenty of room
for Slater's monkey selfies to be granted protection. Under the
authorship requirements set forth by the Supreme Court in Burrow-Giles
and Feist, Slater contributed the requisite degree of creative expression
to qualify as an author. The Seventh Circuit in Kelley wrongly found
that authorship is an entirely human endeavor as the statute and
Compendium II leave open the possibility of copyright protection for
works created jointly by nature and a human author. Moreover, so long
as the human author contributes the necessary original expression, it is
irrelevant who fixes the expression in a tangible form. Finally, the state
of the copyright law best would be served if a clear distinction were
drawn between those true works of nature that the law seeks to prohibit
from copyright protection and quasi-works of nature that would benefit
greatly from protection and encourage the creation of more original
works such as Slater's photographs. Therefore, David Slater ultimately
should prevail in his dispute with Wikimedia and other unlicensed users
of his monkey selfies.
https://scholarship.law.uc.edu/uclr/vol84/iss1/9
22




United States Copyright Office
Copyright Registration Guidance:
Works Containing Material Generated
by Artificial Intelligence
PUBLISHED ON THURSDAY, MARCH 16, 2023
16190 FEDERAL REGISTER, VOL. 88, NO. 51
RULES AND REGULATIONS
37 CFR PART 202
ACTION: Statement of policy
SUMMARY: The Copyright Office issues this statement of policy to clarify its practices for examining and
registering works that contain material generated by the use of artificial intelligence technology.
DATES: This statement of policy is effective March 16, 2023.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Rhea Efthimiadis, Assistant to the General Counsel, by email at
meft@copyright.gov or telephone at 202–707– 8350.
SU PPLEMENTARY I N FORM ATION
I. Background
The Copyright Office (the “Office”) is the Federal agency tasked with administering the
copyright registration system, as well as advising Congress, other agencies, and the Federal
judiciary on copyright and related matters.1 Because the Office has overseen copyright
registration since its origins in 1870, it has developed substantial experience and expertise
regarding “the distinction between copyrightable and noncopyrightable works.”
2 The
Office is empowered by the Copyright Act to establish the application used by applicants
seeking registration of their copyrighted works.
3 While the Act identifies certain minimum
requirements, the Register may determine that additional information is necessary for the
Office to evaluate the “existence, ownership, or duration of the copyright.” 4 Because the
Office receives roughly half a million applications for registration each year, it sees new
trends in registration activity that may require modifying or expanding the information
required to be disclosed on an application.
One such recent development is the use of sophisticated artificial intelligence (“AI”)
technologies capable of producing expressive material.5 These technologies “train” on vast
quantities of preexisting human-authored works and use inferences from that training to
generate new content. Some systems operate in response to a user’s textual instruction,
called a “prompt.”
6 The resulting output may be textual, visual, or audio, and is determined
by the AI based on its design and the material it has been trained on. These technologies,
often described as “generative AI,” raise questions about whether the material they produce
1 | Copyright Registration Guidance: Works Containing Material Generated by Artificial Intelligence
is protected by copyright, whether works consisting of both human-authored and AI-
generated material may be registered, and what information should be provided to the
Office by applicants seeking to register them.
These are no longer hypothetical questions, as the Office is already receiving and
examining applications for registration that claim copyright in AI-generated material. For
example, in 2018 the Office received an application for a visual work that the applicant
described as “autonomously created by a computer algorithm running on a machine.”
7
The application was denied because, based on the applicant’s representations in the
application, the examiner found that the work contained no human authorship. After a
series of administrative appeals, the Office’s Review Board issued a final determination
affirming that the work could not be registered because it was made “without any creative
contribution from a human actor.”
8
More recently, the Office reviewed a registration for a work containing human-authored
elements combined with AI-generated images. In February 2023, the Office concluded
that a graphic novel 9 comprised of human-authored text combined with images generated
by the AI service Midjourney constituted a copyrightable work, but that the individual
images themselves could not be protected by copyright.
10
The Office has received other applications that have named AI technology as the author
or co-author of the work or have included statements in the “Author Created” or “Note
to Copyright Office” sections of the application indicating that the work was produced
by or with the assistance of AI. Other applicants have not disclosed the inclusion of AI-
generated material but have mentioned the names of AI technologies in the title of the
work or the “acknowledgments” section of the deposit.
Based on these developments, the Office concludes that public guidance is needed on the
registration of works containing AI-generated content. This statement of policy describes
how the Office applies copyright law’s human authorship requirement to applications to
register such works and provides guidance to applicants.
The Office recognizes that AI-generated works implicate other copyright issues not
addressed in this statement. It has launched an agency-wide initiative to delve into a wide
range of these issues. Among other things, the Office intends to publish a notice of inquiry
later this year seeking public input on additional legal and policy topics, including how
the law should apply to the use of copyrighted works in AI training and the resulting
treatment of outputs.
II. The Human Authorship Requirement
In the Office’s view, it is well-established that copyright can protect only material that is
the product of human creativity. Most fundamentally, the term “author,” which is used
in both the Constitution and the Copyright Act, excludes non-humans. The Office’s
registration policies and regulations reflect statutory and judicial guidance on this issue.
2 | Copyright Registration Guidance: Works Containing Material Generated by Artificial Intelligence
In its leading case on authorship, the Supreme Court used language excluding non-
humans in interpreting Congress’s constitutional power to provide “authors” the exclusive
right to their “writings.”
11 In Burrow-Giles Lithographic Co. v. Sarony, a defendant accused
of making unauthorized copies of a photograph argued that the expansion of copyright
protection to photographs by Congress was unconstitutional because “a photograph is
not a writing nor the production of an author” but is instead created by a camera.12 The
Court disagreed, holding that there was “no doubt” the Constitution’s Copyright Clause
permitted photographs to be subject to copyright, “so far as they are representatives of
original intellectual conceptions of the author.”
13 The Court defined an “author” as “he to
whom anything owes its origin; originator; maker; one who completes a work of science
or literature.”
14 It repeatedly referred to such “authors” as human, describing authors as a
class of “persons”
15 and a copyright as “the exclusive right of a man to the production of
his own genius or intellect.”
16
Federal appellate courts have reached a similar conclusion when interpreting the text of
the Copyright Act, which provides copyright protection only for “works of authorship.”
17
The Ninth Circuit has held that a book containing words “authored by non-human
spiritual beings” can only qualify for copyright protection if there is “human selection
and arrangement of the revelations.” 18 In another case, it held that a monkey cannot
register a copyright in photos it captures with a camera because the Copyright Act refers
to an author’s “children,” “widow,” “grandchildren,” and “widower,”— terms that “all imply
humanity and necessarily exclude animals.”
19
Relying on these cases among others, the Office’s existing registration guidance has long
required that works be the product of human authorship. In the 1973 edition of the
Office’s Compendium of Copyright Office Practices, the Office warned that it would not
register materials that did not “owe their origin to a human agent.”
20 The second edition
of the Compendium, published in 1984, explained that the “term ‘authorship’ implies
that, for a work to be copyrightable, it must owe its origin to a human being.”
21 And
in the current edition of the Compendium, the Office states that “to qualify as a work
of ‘authorship’ a work must be created by a human being” and that it “will not register
works produced by a machine or mere mechanical process that operates randomly or
automatically without any creative input or intervention from a human author.”
22
III. The Office’s Application of the Human Authorship Requirement
As the agency overseeing the copyright registration system, the Office has extensive
experience in evaluating works submitted for registration that contain human
authorship combined with uncopyrightable material, including material generated by
or with the assistance of technology. It begins by asking “whether the ‘work’ is basically
one of human authorship, with the computer [or other device] merely being an assisting
instrument, or whether the traditional elements of authorship in the work (literary,
artistic, or musical expression or elements of selection, arrangement, etc.) were actually
conceived and executed not by man but by a machine.”
23 In the case of works containing
AI-generated material, the Office will consider whether the AI contributions are the result
3 | Copyright Registration Guidance: Works Containing Material Generated by Artificial Intelligence
of “mechanical reproduction” or instead of an author’s “own original mental conception,
to which [the author] gave visible form.”
24 The answer will depend on the circumstances,
particularly how the AI tool operates and how it was used to create the final work.25 This
is necessarily a case-by-case inquiry.
If a work’s traditional elements of authorship were produced by a machine, the work lacks
human authorship and the Office will not register it
26 For example, when an AI technology
receives solely a prompt
27 from a human and produces complex written, visual, or musical
works in response, the “traditional elements of authorship” are determined and executed
by the technology—not the human user. Based on the Office’s understanding of the
generative AI technologies currently available, users do not exercise ultimate creative
control over how such systems interpret prompts and generate material. Instead, these
prompts function more like instructions to a commissioned artist—they identify what the
prompter wishes to have depicted, but the machine determines how those instructions are
implemented in its output.
28 For example, if a user instructs a text-generating technology
to “write a poem about copyright law in the style of William Shakespeare,” she can expect
the system to generate text that is recognizable as a poem, mentions copyright, and
resembles Shakespeare’s style.
29 But the technology will decide the rhyming pattern, the
words in each line, and the structure of the text.
30 When an AI technology determines
the expressive elements of its output, the generated material is not the product of
human authorship.31 As a result, that material is not protected by copyright and must be
disclaimed in a registration application. 32
In other cases, however, a work containing AI-generated material will also contain
sufficient human authorship to support a copyright claim. For example, a human may
select or arrange AI-generated material in a sufficiently creative way that “the resulting
work as a whole constitutes an original work of authorship.”
33 Or an artist may modify
material originally generated by AI technology to such a degree that the modifications
meet the standard for copyright protection.
34 In these cases, copyright will only protect
the human-authored aspects of the work, which are “independent of ” and do “not affect”
the copyright status of the AI-generated material itself.
35
This policy does not mean that technological tools cannot be part of the creative process.
Authors have long used such tools to create their works or to recast, transform, or adapt
their expressive authorship. For example, a visual artist who uses Adobe Photoshop to edit
an image remains the author of the modified image,
36 and a musical artist may use effects
such as guitar pedals when creating a sound recording. In each case, what matters is the
extent to which the human had creative control over the work’s expression and “actually
formed” the traditional elements of authorship.37
IV. Guidance for Copyright Applicants
Consistent with the Office’s policies described above, applicants have a duty to disclose
the inclusion of AI-generated content in a work submitted for registration and to provide
a brief explanation of the human author’s contributions to the work. As contemplated
4 | Copyright Registration Guidance: Works Containing Material Generated by Artificial Intelligence
by the Copyright Act, such disclosures are “information regarded by the Register of
Copyrights as bearing upon the preparation or identification of the work or the existence,
ownership, or duration of the copyright.”
38
A. How To Submit Applications for Works Containing AI-Generated Material
Individuals who use AI technology in creating a work may claim copyright protection
for their own contributions to that work. They must use the Standard Application,
39
and in it identify the author(s) and provide a brief statement in the “Author Created”
field that describes the authorship that was contributed by a human. For example, an
applicant who incorporates AI-generated text into a larger textual work should claim the
portions of the textual work that is human-authored. And an applicant who creatively
arranges the human and non-human content within a work should fill out the “Author
Created” field to claim: “Selection, coordination, and arrangement of [describe human-
authored content] created by the author and [describe AI content] generated by artificial
intelligence.” Applicants should not list an AI technology or the company that provided it
as an author or co-author simply because they used it when creating their work.
AI-generated content that is more than de minimis should be explicitly excluded from the
application.
40 This may be done in the “Limitation of the Claim” section in the “Other” field,
under the “Material Excluded” heading. Applicants should provide a brief description of the
AI-generated content, such as by entering “[description of content] generated by artificial
intelligence.” Applicants may also provide additional information in the “Note to CO” field
in the Standard Application.
Applicants who are unsure of how to fill out the application may simply provide a
general statement that a work contains AI-generated material. The Office will contact the
applicant when the claim is reviewed and determine how to proceed. In some cases, the
use of an AI tool will not raise questions about human authorship, and the Office will
explain that nothing needs to be disclaimed on the application.
B. How To Correct a Previously Submitted or Pending Application
Applicants who have already submitted applications for works containing AI-generated
material should check that the information provided to the Office adequately disclosed
that material. If not, they should take steps to correct their information so that the
registration remains effective.
For applications currently pending before the Office, applicants should contact the
Copyright Office’s Public Information Office and report that their application omitted the
fact that the work contained AI-generated material.
41
Staff will add a note to the record, which the examiner will see when reviewing the claim.
If necessary, the examiner then will correspond with the applicant to obtain additional
information about the nature of the human authorship included in the work.
5 | Copyright Registration Guidance: Works Containing Material Generated by Artificial Intelligence
For applications that have already been processed and resulted in a registration, the
applicant should correct the public record by submitting a supplementary registration.
A supplementary registration is a special type of registration that may be used “to
correct an error in a copyright registration or to amplify the information given in a
registration.”
42 In the supplementary registration, the applicant should describe the
original material that the human author contributed in the “Author Created” field,
disclaim the AI-generated material in the “Material Excluded/Other” field, and
complete the “New Material Added/Other” field. As long as there is sufficient human
authorship, the Office will issue a new supplementary registration certificate with a
disclaimer addressing the AI-generated material.
43
Applicants who fail to update the public record after obtaining a registration for
material generated by AI risk losing the benefits of the registration. If the Office
becomes aware that information essential to its evaluation of registrability “has been
omitted entirely from the application or is questionable,” it may take steps to cancel
the registration.
44 Separately, a court may disregard a registration in an infringement
action pursuant to section 411(b) of the Copyright Act if it concludes that the
applicant knowingly provided the Office with inaccurate information, and the accurate
information would have resulted in the refusal of the registration.
45
V. Conclusion
This policy statement sets out the Office’s approach to registration of works containing
material generated by AI technology. The Office continues to monitor new factual and
legal developments involving AI and copyright and may issue additional guidance in the
future related to registration or the other copyright issues implicated by this technology.
DATED: MARCH 10, 2023
SHIRA PERLMUTTER, REGISTER OF COPYRIGHTS AND DIRECTOR OF THE U.S. COPYRIGHT OFFICE
[FR DOC. 2023–05321 FILED 3–15–23; 8:45 AM]
6 | Copyright Registration Guidance: Works Containing Material Generated by Artificial Intelligence
end notes
1. See 17 U.S.C. 408 (copyright registration requires delivering deposit, application, and fee
to Copyright Office), 701(a) (all administrative functions and duties set out in Title 17 are the
responsibility of the Register of Copyrights), 701(b)(2) (the Register’s duties include providing
“information and assistance” to Federal agencies and courts on copyright and related matters).
2. Norris Indus. v. Int’l Tel. & Tel. Corp., 696 F.2d 918, 922 (11th Cir. 1983). For this reason, courts
credit the Office’s expertise in interpreting the Copyright Act, particularly in the context
of registration. See, e.g., Esquire, Inc. v. Ringer, 591 F.2d 796, 801–02 (D.C. Cir. 1978) (giving
“considerable weight” to the Register’s refusal determination); Varsity Brands, Inc. v. Star
Athletica, LLC, 799 F.3d 468, 480 (6th Cir. 2015) (“the Copyright Office’s expertise in identifying
and thinking about the difference between art and function surpasses ours”), aff’d on other
grounds, 580 U.S. 405 (2017).
3. 17 U.S.C. 409.
4. Id. at 409(10).
5. The term “expressive material” is used here to refer to AI output that, if it had been created
by a human, would fall within the subject matter of copyright as defined in section 102 of
the Act. See id. at 102(a).
6. See Prompts, Midjourney, https://docs.midjourney.com/docs/prompts (noting for users of the
artificial intelligence service Midjourney a prompt is “a short text phrase that the Midjourney
[service] uses to produce an image”). To be clear, this policy statement is not limited to AI
technologies that accept text “prompts” or to technologies permitting prompts of a particular
length or complexity.
7. U.S. Copyright Office Review Board, Decision Affirming Refusal of Registration of a Recent
Entrance to Paradise at 2 (Feb. 14, 2022), https://www.copyright.gov/rulings-filings/review-
board/docs/a-recent-entrance-to-paradise.pdf.
8. Id. at 2–3. The Office’s decision is currently being challenged in Thaler v. Perlmutter, Case No.
1:22–cv–01564 (D.D.C.).
9. On the application, the applicant described the work as a “comic book.” See U.S. Copyright
Office, Cancellation Decision re: Zarya of the Dawn (VAu001480196) at 2 (Feb. 21, 2023), https://
www.copyright.gov/docs/zarya-of-the-dawn.pdf.
10. Id.
11. U.S. Const. art. I, sec. 8, cl. 8 (Congress has the power “[t]o promote the Progress of Science
and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to
their respective Writings and Discoveries.”).
12. 111 U.S. 53, 56 (1884) (explaining that the defendant had argued that photographs were
merely “reproduction on paper of the exact features of some natural object or of some person”).
13. Id. at 58.
14. Id. at 57–58.
15. Id. at 56 (describing beneficiaries of the Constitution’s Copyright Clause as “authors,” who
are one of “two classes” of “persons”).
16. Id. at 58; see also id. at 60–61 (agreeing with an English decision describing an “author” as
the “person” who was “the cause of the picture which is produced” and “the man” who creates
or gives effect to the idea in the work).
7 | Copyright Registration Guidance: Works Containing Material Generated by Artificial Intelligence
8 | 17. 17 U.S.C. 102(a).
18. Urantia Found. v. Kristen Maaherra, 114 F.3d 955, 957–59 (9th Cir. 1997) (internal punctuation
omitted) (holding that “some element of human creativity must have occurred in order for the
Book to be copyrightable” because “it is not creations of divine beings that the copyright laws were
intended to protect”). While the compilation of the book was entitled to copyright, the alleged
“divine messages” were not. Id.
19. Naruto v. Slater, 888 F.3d 418, 426 (9th Cir. 2018), decided on other grounds.
20. U.S. Copyright Office, Compendium of U.S. Copyright Office Practices sec. 2.8.3(I)(a)(1)(b) (1st
ed. 1973), https://copyright.gov/history/comp/compendium-one.pdf (providing example of shapes
formed by liquid petroleum); see also U.S. Copyright Office, Sixty-Eighth Annual Report of the
Register of Copyrights for the Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 1965, at 5 (1966), https://www.copyright.
gov/reports/annual/archive/ar-1965.pdf (noting that computer-generated works raise a “crucial
question” of whether the work “is basically one of human authorship”).
21. U.S. Copyright Office, Compendium of U.S. Copyright Office Practices sec. 202.02(b) (2d ed. 1984),
https://www.copyright.gov/history/comp/compendium-two.pdf (explaining that as a result, “[m]
aterials produced solely by nature, by plants, or by animals are not copyrightable”). It went on
to state that because “a work must be the product of human authorship,” works “produced by
mechanical processes or random selection without any contribution by a human author are not
registrable.” Id. at 503.03(a).
22. U.S. Copyright Office, Compendium of U.S. Copyright Office Practices sec. 313.2 (3d ed. 2021)
(“Compendium (Third)”).
23. Id. (quoting U.S. Copyright Office, Sixty-Eighth Annual Report of the Register of Copyrights for the
Fiscal Year Ending June 30, 1965, at 5 (1966)).
24. Sarony, 111 U.S. at 60.
25. Many technologies are described or marketed as “artificial intelligence,” but not all of them
function the same way for purposes of copyright law. For that reason, this analysis will be fact specific.
26. This includes situations where an AI technology is developed such that it generates material
autonomously without human involvement. See U.S. Copyright Office Review Board, Decision
Affirming Refusal of Registration of a Recent Entrance to Paradise at 2–3 (Feb. 14, 2022), https://www.
copyright.gov/rulings-filings/review-board/docs/a-recent-entrance-to-paradise.pdf (determining
a work “autonomously created by artificial intelligence without any creative contribution from a
human actor” was “ineligible for registration”).
27. While some prompts may be sufficiently creative to be protected by copyright, that does not
mean that material generated from a copyrightable prompt is itself copyrightable.
28. One image-generating AI product describes prompts as “influencing” the output but does not
suggest the prompts dictate or control it. See Prompts, Midjourney, https://docs.midjourney.com/
docs/prompts (explaining that short text prompts cause “each word [to have] a more powerful
influence” and that images including in a prompt may “influence the style and content of the
finished result”) (emphasis added).
29. AI technologies do not always operate precisely as instructed. For example, a text-generating
tool prompted to provide factual information may provide inaccurate information. One AI service
describes this as the AI “mak[ing] up facts or ‘hallucinat[ing]’ outputs.” ChatGPT General FAQ,
OpenAI, https://help.openai.com/en/articles/ 6783457-chatgpt-general-faq. See also James Romoser,
No, Ruth Bader Ginsburg did not dissent in Obergefell—and other things ChatGPT gets wrong about
the Supreme Court, SCOTUSblog (Jan. 26, 2023), https://www.scotusblog.com/2023/01/no-ruth-
bader-ginsburg-did-not-dissent-in-obergefell-and-other-things-chatgpt-gets-wrong-about-the-
supreme-court/.
Copyright Registration Guidance: Works Containing Material Generated by Artificial Intelligence
30. Some technologies allow users to provide iterative “feedback” by providing additional prompts
to the machine. For example, the user may instruct the AI to revise the generated text to mention
a topic or emphasize a particular point. While such instructions may give a user greater influence
over the output, the AI technology is what determines how to implement those additional
instructions.
31. See id. at 61 (quoting British decision by Lord Justice Cotton describing an author as the
person “who has actually formed the picture”).
32. See Compendium (Third) sec. 503.5 (a copyright registration “does not cover any unclaimable
material that the work may contain,” and applicants “should exclude that material from the
claim”).
33. 17 U.S.C. 101 (definition of “compilation”). In the case of a compilation including AI-generated
material, the computer-generated material will not be protected outside of the compilation.
34. See Compendium (Third) sec. 507.1 (identifying that where a new author modifies a
preexisting work, the “new authorship . . . may be registered, provided that it contains a
sufficient amount of original authorship”); see also 17 U.S.C. 101 (defining “derivative work” to
include works “based upon one or more preexisting works” where modifications to the work
“which, as a whole, represent an original work of authorship”).
35. 17 U.S.C. 103(b).
36. To the extent, however, that an artist uses the AI-powered features in Photoshop, the edits will
be subject to the above analysis.
37. Sarony, 111 U.S. at 61.
38. 17 U.S.C. 409(10).
39. The Office’s other types of application forms do not contain fields where applicants can
disclaim unprotectable material such as AI-generated content. For example, the Single
Application may only be used if “[a]ll of the content appearing in the work” was “created by the
same individual.” 37 CFR 202.3(b)(2)(i)(B).
40. The Office does not require applicants to disclaim “brief quotes, short phrases, and other de
minimis uses” of preexisting works. Compendium (Third) sec. 503.5.
41. The Public Information Office can be reached through the Office’s website (https://copyright.
gov/help/) or by phone at (202) 707–3000 or (877) 476–0778.
42. 17 U.S.C. 408(d); see also Compendium (Third) sec. 1802 (discussing supplementary registration
process); U.S. Copyright Office, Circular 8: Supplementary Registration, https://copyright.gov/circs/
circ08.pdf (last revised Mar. 2021); 37 CFR 201.3(c)(14) (fee schedule for supplementary registration).
43. Though the supplementary registration certificate will have a new registration number
and effective date of registration, the original registration “will not be expunged,” and the
two effective dates “will coexist with each other in the registration record” so that a court can
determine which date to apply if the copyrighted work is later subject to litigation. 37 CFR
202.6(f)(1)–(2); U.S. Copyright Office, Circular 8: Supplementary Registration, https://copyright.gov/
circs/circ08.pdf (last revised Mar. 2021).
44. See 37 CFR 201.7(c)(4). If the work contains human authorship intermingled with AI-created
material, the Office may add an annotation to clarify the scope of the claim.
45. 17 U.S.C. 411(b)(1)(A); Unicolors, Inc. v. H&M Hennes & Mauritz, L.P., 142 S. Ct. 941, 948
(2022) (requiring that the applicant “was actually aware of, or willfully blind to” the inaccurate
information).
9 | Copyright Registration Guidance: Works Containing Material Generated by Artificial Intelligence






contributed articles
d oi : 1 0 . 1 1 4 5 / 1 9 6 5 7 2 4 . 1 9 6 5 7 4 2
The composer still composes but also gets
to take a programming-enabled journey of
musical discovery.
By MIChAEL EDWARDS
Algorithmic
Composition:
Computational
Thinking
in Music
Non-specialists may be disappoint-
ed that composition includes seem-
ingly arbitrary, uninspired formal
methods and calculation.c What we
shall see here is that calculation has
been part of the Western composition
tradition for at least 1,000 years, This
article outlines the history of algorith-
mic composition from the pre- and
post-digital computer age, concentrat-
ing, but not exclusively, on how it de-
veloped out of the avant-garde Western
classical tradition in the second half of
the 20th century. This survey is more
illustrative than all-inclusive, present-
ing examples of particular techniques
and some of the music that has been
produced with them.
A Brief History
Models of musical process are argu-
ably natural to human musical activ-
ity. Listening involves both the enjoy-
ment of the sensual sonic experience
and the setting up of expectations and
possibilities of what is to come: musi-
cologist Erik Christensen described
it as follows: “Retention in short-term
but not written yet” in a letter to his father, Dec.
30, 1780). Mozart apparently distinguished be-
tween composing (at the keyboard, in sketch-
es) and writing (preparing a full and final
score), hence the confusion about the length of
time taken to write certain pieces of music.
c For example, in the realm of pitch: transpo-
sition, inversion, retrogradation, intervallic
expansion, compression; and in the realm of
rhythm: augmentation, diminution, addition.
In the West, the layman’s vision of the creative artist is
largely bound in romantic notions of inspiration sacred
or secular in origin. Images are plentiful; for example, a
man standing tall on a cliff top, the wind blowing through
his long hair, waiting for that particular iconoclastic idea
to arrive through the ether.a Tales, some even true, of
genii penning whole operas in a matter of days, further
blur the reality of the usually slowly wrought process of
composition. Mozart, with his celebrated speed of writing,
is a famous example who to some extent fits the cliché,
though perhaps not quite as well as legend would have it.b
key insights
a I’m thinking in particular of Caspar David Friedrich’s painting From the Summit in the Hamburg
Kunsthalle.
b Mozart’s compositional process is complex and often misunderstood, complicated by myth, espe-
cially regarding his now refuted ability to compose everything in his head15 and his own statements
(such as “I must finish now, because I’ve got to write at breakneck speed—everything’s composed—
58 c o M M u n I C AT I o ns of t he AC M | j u ly 2 0 1 1 | vo l . 5 4 | n o. 7
  Music composition has always
been guided by the composer’s own
computational thinking, sometimes
even more than by traditional
understanding of inspiration.
  Formalization of compositional
technique in software can free the mind
from musical and cultural clichés and
lead to startlingly original results.
  Algorithmic composition systems
cover all aesthetics and styles,
with some open-ended variants
offering an alternative to the fixed,
never-changing compositions that for
most of us define the musical limits.
I l lu st r ati o n by St u D I o to n n e
c r e D I t t k
j u ly 2 0 1 1 | vo l . 5 4 | n o. 7 | c o M M u n I C AT I o ns of t he AC M 59
contributed articles
Figure 1. First part of Mozart’s Musikalisches Würfelspiel (“Musical Dice”): Letters over
columns refer to eight parts of a waltz; numbers to the left of rows indicate possible
values of two thrown dice; and numbers in the matrix refer to bar numbers of four pages
of musical fragments combined to create the algorithmic waltz.
A B C D E F GH
2 96 22 141 41 105 122 11 30
3 32 6 128 63 146 46 134 81
4 69 95 158 13 153 55 110 24
5 40 17 113 85 161 2 159 100
6 148 74 163 45 80 97 36 107
7 104 157 27 167 154 68 118 91
8 152 60 171 53 99 133 21 127
9 119 84 114 50 140 86 169 94
2 98 142 42 156 75 129 62 123
11 3 87 165 61 135 47 147 33
12 54 130 10 103 28 37 106 5
Figure 2. Part of an advertisement for The Geniac Electric Brain, a DIY music-computer kit.
memory permits the experience of co-
herent musical entities, comparison
with other events in the musical flow,
conscious or subconscious compari-
son with previous musical experience
stored in long-term memory, and the
continuous formation of expectations
of coming musical events.”9
This second active part of musical
listening is what gives rise to the possi-
bility and development of musical form;
composer György Ligeti wrote, “Because
we spontaneously compare any new fea-
ture appearing in consciousness with
the features already experienced, and
from this comparison draw conclusions
about coming features, we pass through
the musical edifice as if its construction
were present in its totality. The interac-
tion of association, abstraction, mem-
ory, and prediction is the prerequisite
for the formation of the web of relations
that renders the conception of musical
form possible.”30
For centuries, composers have tak-
en advantage of this property of music
cognition to formalize compositional
structure. We cannot, of course, con-
flate formal planning with algorithmic
techniques, but that the former should
lead to the latter was, as I argue here,
an historical inevitability.
Around 1026, Guido d’Arezzo (the in-
ventor of staff notation) developed a for-
mal technique to set a text to music. A
pitch was assigned to each vowel so the
60 c o M M u n I C AT I o ns of t he AC M | j u ly 2 0 1 1 | vo l . 5 4 | n o. 7
melody varied according to the vowels
in the text.22 The 14th and 15th centu-
ries saw development of the quasi-algo-
rithmic isorhythmic technique, where
rhythmic cycles (talea) are repeated,
often with melodic cycles (color) of the
same or differing lengths, potentially,
though not generally in practice, lead-
ing to very long forms before the begin-
ning of a rhythmic and melodic repeat
coincide. Across ages and cultures, rep-
etition, and therefore memory (of short
motifs, longer themes, and whole sec-
tions) is central to the development of
musical form. In the Western context,
this repetition is seen in various guises,
including the Classical rondo (with sec-
tion structures, such as ABACA); the Ba-
roque fugue; and the Classical sonata
form, with its return not just of themes
but to tonality, too.
Compositions based on number ra-
tios are also found throughout Western
musical history; for example, Guillau-
me Dufay’s (1400–1474) isorhythmic
motet Nuper Rosarum Flores, written
for the consecration of Florence Ca-
thedral, March 25, 1436. The temporal
structure of the motet is based on the
ratios 6:4:2:3, these being the propor-
tions of the nave, the crossing, the
apse, and the height of the arch of the
cathedral. A subject of much debate
is how far the use of proportional sys-
tems was conscious on the part of vari-
ous composers, especially with regards
to Fibonacci numbers and the Golden
Section.d Evidence of Fibonacci rela-
tionships haas been found in, for in-
stance, the music of Bach,32 Schubert,19
and Bartók,27 as well as in various other
works of the 20th century.25
Mozart is thought to have used al-
gorithmic techniques explicitly at least
once. His Musikalisches Würfelspiel
(“Musical Dice”)e uses musical frag-
ments that are to be combined random-
ly according to dice throws (see Figure
1). Such formalization procedures are
d Fibonacci was an Italian mathematician
(c.1170–c.1250) for whom the famous num-
ber series is named. This is a simple progres-
sion where successive numbers are the sum
of the previous two: (0), 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21...
Ascending the sequence, the ratio of two ad-
jacent numbers gets closer to the so-called
Golden Ratio (approximately 1:1.618).
e Attributed to Mozart though not officially au-
thenticated despite being designated K. Anh.
294d in the Köchel Catalogue of his works.
not limited to religious or art music.
The Quadrille Melodist, sold by Profes-
sor J. Clinton of the Royal Conservatory
of Music, London (1865) was marketed
as a set of cards that allowed a pianist to
generate quadrille music (similar to a
square dance). The system could appar-
ently make 428 million quadrilles.34
Right at the outset of the computer
age, algorithmic composition moved
straight into the popular, kit-builder’s
domain. The Geniac Electric Brain al-
lowed customers to build a computer
with which they could generate auto-
matic tunes (see Figure 2).36 Such sys-
tems find their modern counterpart
in the automatic musical accompani-
ment software Band-in-a-Box (http://
band-in-a-box.com/).
The avant-garde. After World War
II, many Western classical music com-
posers continued to develop the serialf
technique invented by Arnold Schön-
berg (1874–1951) et al. Though gener-
ally seen as a radical break with tradi-
tion, in light of the earlier historical
examples just presented, serialism’s
detailed organization can be viewed
as no more than a continuation of
the tradition of formalizing musical
composition. Indeed, one of the new
generation’s criticisms of Schönberg
was that he radicalized only pitch
structure, leaving other parameters
(such as rhythm, dynamic, even form)
in the 19th century.6 They looked to
the music of Schönberg’s pupil Anton
von Webern for inspiration in organiz-
ing these other parameters according
to serial principles. Hence the rise of
the total serialists: Boulez, Stockhau-
sen, Pousseur, Nono, and others in
Europe, and Milton Babbitt and his
students at Princeton.g
Several composers, notably Xenakis
(1922–2001) and Ligeti (1923–2006),
f Serialism is an organizational system in which
pitches (first of all) are organized into so-called
12-tone rows, where each pitch in a musical
octave is present and, ideally, equally distrib-
uted throughout the piece. This technique was
developed most famously by Schönberg in the
early 1920s at least in part as a response to the
difficulty of structuring atonal music, music
with no tonal center or key (such as C major).
g Here, we begin to distinguish between pieces
that organize pitch only according to the series
(dodecaphony) from those extending organi-
zation into music’s other parameters—strictly
speaking serialism, also known as integral or
total serialism.
contributed articles
Much of the
resistance to
algorithmic
composition that
persists to
this day stems
from the misguided
bias that
the computer,
not the composer,
composes
the music.
offered criticism of and alternatives
to serialism, but, significantly, their
music was also often governed by com-
plex, even algorithmic, procedures.h
The complexity of new composition
systems made their implementation
in computer programs ever more at-
tractive. Furthermore, development
of software algorithms in other dis-
ciplines made cross-fertilization rife.
Thus some techniques are inspired
by systems outside the realm of mu-
sic (such as chaos theory (Ligeti, Dé-
sordre), neural networks (Gerhard E.
Winkler, Hybrid II “Networks”),39 and
Brownian motion (Xenakis, Eonta).
Computer-Based
Algorithmic Composition
Lejaren Hiller (1924–1994) is widely
recognized as the first composer to
have applied computer programs to
algorithmic composition. The use of
specially designed, unique computer
hardware was common at U.S. univer-
sities in the mid-20th century. Hiller
used the Illiac computer at the Univer-
sity of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, to
create experimental new music with
algorithms. His collaboration with
Leonard Isaacson resulted in 1956
in the first known computer-aided
composition, The Illiac Suite for String
Quartet, programmed in binary, and
using, among other techniques, Mar-
kov Chainsi in “random walk” pitch-
generation algorithms.38
Famous for his own random-pro-
cess-influenced compositions, if not
his work with computers, composer
John Cage recognized the potential
of Hiller’s systems earlier than most.
The two collaborated on HPSCHD,
a piece for “7 harpsichords playing
randomly-processed music by Mo-
zart and other composers, 51 tapes
of computer-generated sounds, ap-
proximately 5,000 slides of abstract
h For a very approachable introduction to the
musical thought of Ligeti and Xenakis, see
The Musical Timespace, chapter 2,9 particularly
pages 36–39.
i First presented in 1906, Markov chains are
named for the Russian mathematician Andrey
Markov (1856–1922), whose research into ran-
dom processes led to his eponymous theory,
and today are among the most popular algo-
rithmic composition tools. Being stochastic
processes, where future states are dependent
on current and perhaps past states, they are
applicable to, say, pitch selection.
j u ly 2 0 1 1 | vo l . 5 4 | n o. 7 | c o M M u n I C AT I o ns of t he AC M 61
contributed articles
designs and space exploration, and
several films.”16 It premiered at the
University of Illinois, Urbana-Cham-
paign, in 1969. Summarizing per-
spicaciously an essential difference
between traditional and computer-
assisted composition, Cage said in
an interview during the composi-
tion of HPSCHD, “Formerly, when
one worked alone, at a given point a
decision was made, and one went in
one direction rather than another;
whereas, in the case of working with
another person and with computer
facilities, the need to work as though
decisions were scarce—as though you
had to limit yourself to one idea—is
no longer pressing. It’s a change from
the influences of scarcity or economy
to the influences of abundance and—
I’d be willing to say—waste.”3
Stochastic versus deterministic pro-
cedures. A basic historical division in
the world of algorithmic composition
is between indeterminate and determi-
nate models, or those that use stochas-
tic/random procedures (such as Mar-
kov chains) and those where results
are fixed by the algorithms and remain
unchanged no matter how often the al-
gorithms are run. Examples of the lat-
ter are cellular automata (though they
can be deterministic or stochastic34);
Lindenmayer Systems (see the section
on the deterministic versus stochastic
debate in this context); Charles Ames’s
constrained search algorithms for se-
lecting material properties against a
series of constraints1; and the com-
positions of David Cope that use his
Experiments in Musical Intelligence sys-
tem.10 The latter is based on the con-
Algorithmic
composition is often
viewed as a sideline
in contemporary
musical activity,
as opposed to a
logical application
and incorporation
of compositional
technique into
the digital domain.
Figure 3. Simple L-System rules.
1 → 2 3
2 → 1 3
3 → 2 1
Figure 4. Step-by-step generation of results
from simple L-System rules and a seed.
cept of “recombinacy,” where new mu-
sic is created from existing works, thus
allowing the recreation of music in the
style of various classical composers, to
the shock and delight of many.
Xenakis. Known primarily for his in-
strumental compositions but also as an
engineer and architect, Iannis Xenakis
was a pioneer of algorithmic composi-
tion and computer music. Using lan-
guage typical of the sci-fi age, he wrote,
“With the aid of electronic computers,
the composer becomes a sort of pilot:
he presses buttons, introduces coordi-
nates, and supervises the controls of
a cosmic vessel sailing in the space of
sound, across sonic constellations and
galaxies that he could formerly glimpse
only in a distant dream.”40
Xenakis’s approach, which led to the
Stochastic Music Programme (henceforth
SMP) and radically new pieces (such as
Pithoprakta, 1956), used formulae origi-
nally developed by scientists to explain
the behavior of gas particles (Maxwell’s
and Boltzmann’s Kinetic Theory of
Gases).31 He saw his stochastic com-
positions as clouds of sound, with in-
dividual notesj as the analogue of gas
particles. The choice and distribution
of notes was determined by procedures
involving random choice, probability
tables weighing the occurrence of spe-
cific events against those of others. Xe-
nakis created several works with SMP,
often more than one with the output of
a single computer batch process,k prob-
ably due to limited access to the IBM
7090 he used. His Eonta (1963–1964) for
two trumpets, three tenor trombones,
and piano was composed with SMP. The
program was applied in particular to the
creation of the massively complex open-
ing piano solo.
Like another algorithmic compo-
sition and computer-music pioneer,
Gottfried Michael Koenig (1926–), Xe-
nakis had no compunction adapting
the output of his algorithms as he saw
fit. Regarding Atrées (1962), Xenakis’s
biographer Nouritza Matossian claims
Xenakis used “75% computer material,
Seed: 2
1 3
2 3 | 2 1
1 3 | 2 1 | 1 3 | 2 3
2 3 | 2 1 | 1 3 | 2 3 | 2 3 | 2 1 | 1 3 | 2 1
j Notes are a combination of pitch and dura-
tion, rather than just pitch.
k Matossian wrote, “With a single 45-minute
program on the IBM 7090, he [Xenakis] suc-
ceeded in producing not only eight composi-
tions that stand up as integral works but also
in leading the development of computer-aided
composition.”31
62 c o M M u n I C AT I o ns of t he AC M | j u ly 2 0 1 1 | vo l . 5 4 | n o. 7
composing the remainder himself.”31
At least in Koenig’s Projekt 1 (1964)l Koe-
nig saw transcription (from computer
output to musical score) as an impor-
tant part of the process of algorithmic
composition, writing, “Neither the his-
tograms nor the connection algorithm
contains any hints about the envisaged,
‘unfolded’ score, which consists of in-
structions for dividing the labor of the
production changes mode, that is, the
division into performance parts. The
histogram, unfolded to reveal the indi-
vidual time and parameter values, has
to be split up into voices.”24
Hiller, on the other hand, believed
that if the output of the algorithm is
deemed insufficient, then the program
should be modified and the output
regenerated.34 Several programs that
facilitate algorithmic composition in-
clude direct connection to their own
or to third-party computer sound gen-
eration.m This connection obviates the
need for transcription and even hin-
ders this arguably fruitful intervention.
Furthermore, such systems allow the
traditional or even conceptual score to
be redundant. Thus algorithmic com-
position techniques allow a fluid and
unified relationship between macro-
structural musical form and micro-
structural sound synthesis/processing,
as evidenced again by Xenakis in his
Dynamic Stochastic Synthesis program
Gendy3 (1992).40
More current examples. Contem-
porary (late 20th century) techniques
tend to be hybrids of deterministic
and stochastic approaches. Systems
using techniques from artificial intel-
ligence (AI) and/or linguistics are the
generative-grammarn-based system Bol
Processor software4 and expert systems
(such as Kemal Ebcioglu’s CHORAL11).
Other statistical approaches that use,
say, Hidden Markov Models (as in Jor-
danous and Smaill20), tend to need a
significant amount of data to train the
system; they therefore rely on and gen-
erate pastiche copies of the music of a
particular composer (that must be codi-
l Written to test the rules of serial music but in-
volving random decisions.23
m Especially modern examples (such as Com-
mon Music, Pure Data, and SuperCollider).
n Such systems are generally inspired by Chom-
sky’s grammar models8 and Lerdahl’s and
Jackendorff’s applications of such approaches
to generative music theory.28
contributed articles
Figure 5. Larger result set from simple L-System rules.
2 3 2 1 1 3 2 3 2 3 2 1 1 3 2 1 1 3 2 1 1 3 2 3 2 3 2
1 1 3 2 3 2 3 2 1 1 3 2 3 2 3 2 1 1 3 2 1 1 3 2 1 1 3
2 3 2 3 2 1 1 3 2 1 1 3 2 1 1 3 2 3 2 3 2 1 1 3 2 1 1
3 2 1 1 3 2 3 2 3 2 1 1 3 2 3 2 3 2 1 1 3 2 3 2 3 2 1
Eno said about his Discreet Music
(1975), “Since I have always preferred
making plans to executing them, I
have gravitated towards situations and
systems that, once set into operation,
could create music with little or no in-
tervention on my part. That is to say, I
tend towards the roles of planner and
programmer, and then become an au-
dience to the results.”18
Improvisation systems. Algorithmic
composition techniques are, then,
clearly not limited to music of a cer-
tain aesthetic or stylistic persuasion.
Nor are they limited to a completely
fixed view of composition, where all
the pitches and rhythms are set down
in advance. George Lewis’s Voyager
is a work for human improvisors and
“computer-driven, interactive ‘virtual
improvising orchestra.’”29 Its roots
are, according to Lewis, in the African-
American tradition of multi-domi-
nance, described by him (borrowing
from Jeff Donaldson) as involving mul-
tiple simultaneous structural streams,
these being in the case of Voyager at
“both the logical structure of the soft-
ware and its performance articula-
tion.”29 Lewis programmed Voyager in
the Forth language popular with com-
puter musicians in the 1980s. Though
in Voyager the computer is used to
analyze and respond to a human im-
proviser, such input is not essential
for the program to generate music
(via MIDIo). Lewis wrote, “I conceive
a performance of Voyager as multiple
parallel streams of music generation,
emanating from both the computers
and the humans—a nonhierarchi-
cal, improvisational, subject-subject
model of discourse, rather than a
stimulus/response setup.”29 A related
improvisation system, OMAX, from
the Institut de Recherche et Coordina-
fied in machine-readable form) or his-
torical style. While naturally significant
to AI research, linguistics, and com-
puter science, such systems tend to be
of limited use to composers writing mu-
sic in a modern and personal style that
perhaps resists codification because
of its notational and sonic complexity
and, more simply, its lack of sufficient
and stylistically consistent data—the
so-called sparse-data problem. But this
is also to some extent indicative of the
general difficulty of modeling language
and human cognition; the software
codification of the workings of a spoken
language understood by many and rea-
sonably standardized is one thing; the
codification of the quickly developing
and widely divergent field of contempo-
rary music is another thing altogether.
Thus we can witness a division between
composers concerned with creating
new music with personalized systems
and researchers interested in develop-
ing systems for machine learning and
AI. The latter may quite understandably
find it more useful to generate music
in well-known styles not only because
there is extant data but also because
familiarity of material simplifies some
aspects of the assessment of results.
Naturally though, more collaboration
between composers and researchers
could lead to fruitful, aesthetically pro-
gressive results.
Outside academia. Application of
algorithmic-composition techniques
is not restricted to academia or to the
classical avant garde. Pop/ambient mu-
sician Brian Eno (1948–) is known for
his admiration and use of generative
systems in Music for Airports (1978) and
other pieces. Eno was inspired by the
American minimalists, in particular
Steve Reich (1936–) and his tape piece
It’s Gonna Rain (1965). This is not com-
puter music but process music, where-
by a system is devised—usually repeti-
tive in the case of the minimalists—and
allowed to run, generating music in the
form of notation or electronic sound.
o Musical Instrument Digital Interface, or MIDI,
the standard music-industry protocol for in-
terconnecting electronic instruments and re-
lated devices.
j u ly 2 0 1 1 | vo l . 5 4 | n o. 7 | c o M M u n I C AT I o ns of t he AC M 63
contributed articles
tion Acoustique/Musique in Paris, is
available within the now more widely
used computer-music systems Max/
MSP and Open-Music. OMAX uses AI-
based machine-learning techniques
to parse incoming musical data from
human musicians, then the results of
analysis to generate new material in
an improvisatory context.2
slippery chicken. In my own case,
work on the specialized algorithmic
composition program slippery chick-
en13 is ongoing since 2000. Written in
Common Lisp and its object-oriented
extension, the Common Lisp Object
System, it is mainly deterministic but
also has stochastic elements. It has
been used to create musical structure
for pieces since its inception and is
now at the stage where it can gener-
ate, in a single pass, complete musical
scores for traditional instruments or
with the same data write sound files
using samplesp or MIDI file realiza-
tions of the instrumental score.q The
project’s main aim is to facilitate a
melding of electronic and instrumen-
tal sound worlds, not just at the sonic
but at the structural level. Hence cer-
tain processes common in one me-
dium (such as audio slicing and loop-
ing) are transferred to another (such
as the slicing up of notated musical
phrases and instigation of sub-phrase
loops). Also offered are techniques for
innovative combination of rhythmic
and pitch data, which is, in my opin-
ion, one of the most difficult aspects of
making convincing musical algorithms.
Lindenmayer systems. Like writing
a paper, composing music, especially
with computer-based algorithms, is
most often an iterative process. Mate-
rial is first set down in raw form, only
to be edited, developed, and reworked
over several passes before the final
refined form is achieved. For the com-
poser, stochastic procedures, if not
simply to be used to generate mate-
rial to be reworked by hand or in some
other fashion, represent particular
problems. If an alteration of the algo-
Figure 6. Fibonacci-based transition from material 0 to material 1. Note the first
appearance of 1 is at position 13, with the next eight positions after that, the next again
five positions after that, and so on; all these numbers are so-called Fibonacci numbers.
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 0
0 1 0 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 0 1 1
1 1 1 1 1 1
Figure 7. Extract beginning bar 293 of the author’s Tramontana for viola and computer.
Figure 8. Foreground melodic pattern (scale steps) of Désordre.
26
Right hand (white notes), 26 notes, 14 bars
Phrase a: 0 0 1 0 2 1 -1
Phrase a’: -1 -1 2 1 3 2 -2
Phrase b: 2 2 4 3 5 4 -1 0 3 2 6 5
Left hand (black notes), 33 notes, 18 bars
Phrase a: 0 0 1 0 2 2 0
Phrase a’: 1 1 2 1 -2 -2 -1
Phrase b: 1 1 2 2 0 -1 -4 -3 0 -1 3 2 1 -1 0 -3 -2 -3 -5
rithm is deemed necessary, no matter
how small, then rerunning the proce-
dure is essential. But rerunning will
generate a different set of randomly
controlled results, perhaps now lack-
ing some characteristics the compos-
er deemed musically significant after
the first pass.r
Deterministic procedures can be
more apposite. For instance, Linden-
mayer Systemss (henceforth L-Systems)
whose simplicity and elegance yet re-
p Samples are usually short digital sound files
of individual or arbitrary number of notes/
sonic events.
q To accomplish this, the software interfaces
with parts of the open-source software systems
Common Music, Common Lisp Music, and
Common Music Notation all freely available
from http://ccrma.stanford.edu/software.
r This is a simplistic description. Most sto-
chastic procedures involve encapsulation of
various tendencies over arbitrarily large data
sets, the random details of which are insignifi-
cant compared to the structure of the whole.
Still, some details may take on more musical
importance than intended, and losing them
may detrimentally affect the composition. The
composer could avoid such problems by using
a random number generator with fixed and
stored seed, guaranteeing the pseudo-random
numbers are generated in the same order each
time the process is restarted. Better still would
be to modify the algorithm to take these sa-
lient, though originally unforeseen features,
into account.
s Named for biologist Aristid Lindenmayer
(1925–1989) who developed this system (or
formal language, based on grammars by Noam
Chomsky33) that can model various natural-
growth processes (such as those of plants).
64 c o M M u n I C AT I o ns of t he AC M | j u ly 2 0 1 1 | vo l . 5 4 | n o. 7
sulting self-similarity make them ideal
for composition. Take a simple exam-
ple, where a set of rules is defined and
associates a key with a result of two fur-
ther keys that in turn form indices for
an arbitrary number of iterations of key
substitution (see Figure 3).
Given a starting seed for the lookup
and substitution procedure (or rewrit-
ing, as it is more generally known), an
infinite number of results can be gen-
erated (see Figure 4).
Self-similarity is clear when larger
result sets are produced; see Figure
5, noting the repetitions of sequenc-
es (such as 2 1 1 3 and 2 3 2 3). These
numbers can be applied to any musi-
cal parameter or material, including
pitch, rhythm, dynamic, phrase, and
harmony. Seen musically, the results
of such simple L-Systems tend toward
stasis in that only results that are part
of the original rules are returned, and
all results are present throughout the
returned sequence. However, the re-
sult is dependent on the rules defined:
subtle manipulations of more com-
plex/numerous rules can result in mu-
sically interesting developments. For
instance, composers have used more
finessed L-Systems—where the result
contributed articles
of a particular rule may be dependent
on a sub-rule—leading to more or-
ganic, developing forms. Hanspeter
Kyburz’s (1960–) Cells for saxophone
and ensemble is an example. Martin
Supper38 described Kyburz’s use of L-
Systems, using results from 13 genera-
tions of L-System rewrites to select pre-
composed musical motifs. Like Hiller
before him, Kyburz uses algorithmic
composition techniques to generate
and select musical material for the
preparation of instrumental scores.
However, the listener is probably un-
aware of the application of software in
the composition of such music.
Transitioning L-Systems: Tramon-
tana. As I tend to write music that is
concerned with development and
transition, my use of L-Systems is
somewhat more convoluted. My
own Tramontana (2004) for viola and
computer14 uses L-Systems in its
concluding section. Unlike normal
L-Systems, however, I employ Transi-
tioning L-Systems, my own invention,
whereby the numbers returned by the
L-System are used as lookup indices
into a table whose result depends on
transitions between related but devel-
oping material. The transitions them-
selves use Fibonacci-based “folding-
in” structures where the new material
is interspersed gradually until it be-
comes dominant; for example, a tran-
sition from material 0 to material 1
might look like Figure 6.
In the case of the concluding sec-
tion of Tramontana, there is slow de-
velopment from fast, repeated chords
toward more and more flageoletst on
the C and G strings. Normal pitches
and half flageoletsu begin to dominate,
with a tendency toward more of the
former. At this point, flageolets on the
D string are also introduced. All these
developments are created with transi-
tioning L-Systems. The score (see Fig-
ure 7 for a short extract) was generated
with Bill Schottstaedt’s Common Music
CuRTIS RoADS, 1996
It takes a good
composer to design
algorithms that
result in music
that captures
the imagination.
Notation software, taking advantage of
its ability to include algorithmically
placed nonstandard note heads and
other musical signs. Perhaps worth
noting is that even before I began work
with computers, I was already compos-
ing in such a manner. Now, with slip-
pery chicken algorithms, these struc-
tures can be programmed to generate
the music, test, re-work, and re-gen-
erate. A particular advantage of work-
ing with the computer here is that it is
a simple matter to extend or shorten
sections, something that would, with
pencil and paper, be so time-consum-
ing as to be prohibitive.
Musical Example: Ligeti’s Désordre
György Ligeti (1923–2006) is known
to the general public mainly through
his music in several Stanley Kubrick
films: 2001: A Space Odyssey, which
included Lux Aeterna and Requiem
(without Ligeti’s permission, prompt-
ing a protracted but failed lawsuit);
The Shining, which included Lontano;
and Eyes Wide Shut, which included
Musica Ricercata.
After leaving his native Hungary in
the late 1950s, Ligeti worked in the
same studios as Cologne electronic
music pioneers Karlheinz Stockhau-
sen and Gottfried Michael Koenig
though produced little electronic mu-
sic of his own. However, his interest in
science and mathematics led to sev-
eral instrumental pieces influenced
by, for example, fractal geometry and
chaos theory. But these influences did
not lead to a computer-based algo-
rithmic approach.v He was quoted in
Steinitz37 saying, “Somewhere under-
neath, very deeply, there’s a common
place in our spirit where the beauty of
mathematics and the beauty of music
meet. But they don’t meet on the level
of algorithms or making music by cal-
culation. It’s much lower, much deep-
er—or much higher, you could say.”
Nevertheless, as a further example,
we shall consider the structure of Györ-
gy Ligeti’s Désordre from his first book
of Piano Etudes for several reasons:
Structures. The structures of Désor-
dre are deceptively simple in concept
t Familiar to guitarists, flageolets, and harmon-
ics are special pitches achieved by touching
the string lightly with a left-hand finger at a
nodal point in order to bring out higher fre-
quencies related to the fundamental of the
open string by integer multiples.
u Half flageolets are achieved by pressing the
string, as with a full flageolet, but not at a
nodal point; the result is a darker, dead-
sounding pitch.
v Ligeti’s son, Lukas, confirmed to me that his
father was interested conceptually in comput-
ers, reading about them over the years, but
never worked with them in practice.
j u ly 2 0 1 1 | vo l . 5 4 | n o. 7 | c o M M u n I C AT I o ns of t he AC M 65
contributed articles
yet beautifully elegant in effect, where
the clearly deterministic algorithmic
thinking lends itself quite naturally to
software implementation;
Algorithmic composition. Ligeti was
a major composer, admired by experts
and non-experts alike, and is gener-
ally not associated with algorithmic
composition; indeed, Désordre was al-
most certainly composed “algorithmi-
cally” by hand, with pencil and paper,
as opposed to at a computer keyboard.
As such, Désordre illustrates the clear
link in the history of composition to
algorithmic/computational thinking,
bringing algorithmic composition into
mainstream musical focus; and
Algorithmic models. I have imple-
mented algorithmic models of the
first part of Désordre in the open-
source software system Pure Data,
which, along with the following dis-
cussion, is based on analyses by To-
bias Kunze,26 used here with permis-
sion, and Hartmut Kinzler.21 It is freely
downloadable from my Web site http://
www.michael-edwards.org/software/
desordre.zip12; tinkering with the ini-
tial data states is instructive and fun.
Désordre’s algorithms. The main
argument of Désordre consists of fore-
ground and background textures:
Foreground (accented, loud). Two si-
multaneous instances of the same basic
process, melodic/rhythmic, one in each
hand, both doubled at the octave, and
white note (righthand) and black-notew
(pentatonic, lefthand) modes; and
Background (quiet). Continuous,
generally rising quaver (eighth-note)
pulse notes, centered between the fore-
ground octaves, one in each hand, in
the same mode as the foreground hand.
In the first part of the piece the
basic foreground process consists
of a melodic pattern cycle consist-
ing of the scale-step shape in Figure
8. This cycle is stated on successively
higher (right-hand, 14 times, one dia-
tonic step transposition) and lower
(lefthand, 11 times, two diatonic steps
transposition) degrees. Thus, a global,
long-term movement is created from
w White and black here refer to the color of the
keys on the modern piano.
Figure 9. Foreground rhythmic pattern (quaver/eighth-note durations) of Désordre.
26
right hand:
cycle 1: a: 3 5 3 5 5 3 7
a’: 3 5 3 5 5 3 7
b: 3 5 3 5 5 3 3 4 5 3 3 5
cycle 2: 3 5 3 4 5 3 8
3 5 3 4 5 3 8
3 5 3 4 5 3 3 5 5 3 3 4
cycle 3: 3 5 3 5 5 3 7
3 5 3 5 5 3 7
3 5 3 5 5 3 3 4 5 3 3 5
cycle 4: 3 5 3 4 5 2 7
2 4 2 4 4 2 5
2 3 2 3 3 1 1 3 3 1 1 3
cycle 5: 1 2 1 2 2 1 3
1 2 1 2 2 1 3
1 2 1 2 2 1 1 2 2 1 1 2
...
left hand:
3 5 3 5 5 3 8
3 5 3 5 5 3 8
3 5 3 5 5 3 3 5 5 3 3 5 3 5 3 5 5 3 8
3 5 3 5 5 3 8
3 5 3 5 5 3 8
3 5 3 5 5 3 3 5 5 3 3 5 3 5 3 5 5 3 8
3 5 3 5 5 3 8
3 5 3 5 5 2 7
3 4 3 4 4 2 2 4 4 2 2 3 2 3 1 3 3 1 4
1 3 1 2 2 1 3
1 2 1 2 2 1 3
1 2 1 2 2 1 1 2 2 1 1 2 1 2 1 2 2 1 3
1 3 1 2 2 1 3
1 2 1 2 2 1 3
1 2 1 2 2 1 1 2 2 1 1 2 1 2 1 2 2 1 2
...
Figure 10. Désordre. First system of score © 1986 Schott Music GmbH & Co. KG, Mainz,
Germany. Reproduced by permission. All rights reserved.
66 c o M M u n I C AT I o ns of t he AC M | j u ly 2 0 1 1 | vo l . 5 4 | n o. 7
the middle of the piano outward, to
the high and low extremes.
The foreground rhythmic process
consists of slower-moving, irregular
combinations of quaver-multiples that
tend to reduce in duration over the
melodic cycle repeats to create an ac-
celeration toward continuous quaver
pulses (see Figure 9).
The similarity between the two
hands’ foreground rhythmic structure
is obvious, but the duration of seven
quavers in the right hand at the end
of cycle 1a, as opposed to eight in the
left, makes for the clearly audible de-
coupling of the two parts. This is the
beginning of the process of disorder,
or chaos, and is reflected in the unsyn-
chronized bar lines of the score starting
at this point (see Figure 10).
In Désordre we experience a clear,
compelling, yet not entirely predict-
able musical development of rhythmic
acceleration coupled with a movement
from the middle piano register to the
extremes of high and low, all expressed
through two related and repeating
melodic cycles with slightly differing
lengths resulting in a combination
that dislocates and leads to metrical
disorder. I invite the reader to investi-
gate this in more detail by download-
ing my software implementation.12
Conclusion
There has been (and still is) consider-
able resistance to algorithmic compo-
sition from all sides, from musicians
to the general public. This resistance
bears comparison to the reception
of the supposedly overly mathemati-
cal serial approach introduced by the
composers of the Second Viennese
School of the 1920s and 1930s. Along-
side the techniques of other music
composed from the beginning of the
20th century onward, the serial princi-
ple itself is frequently considered to be
the reason the music—so-called mod-
ern music, though now close to 100
years old—may not appeal. I propose
that a more enlightened approach to
the arts in general, especially those
that present a challenge, would be a
more inward-looking examination of
the individual response, a deferral of
judgment and acknowledgment that,
first and foremost, a lack of famil-
iarity with the style and content may
lead to a neutral or negative audience
response. Only after further investiga-
tion and familiarization can deficien-
cies in the work be considered.x
Algorithmic composition is often
viewed as a sideline in contemporary
musical activity, as opposed to a logi-
cal application and incorporation of
compositional technique into the digi-
tal domain. Without wishing to im-
ply that instrumental composition is
in a general state of stagnation, if the
computer is the universal tool, there
is surely no doubt that not applying it
to composition would be, if not exactly
an example of Luddism, then at least
to risk missing important aesthetic de-
velopments that only the computer can
facilitate, and that other artistic fields
already take advantage of. That algo-
rithmic thinking is present in Western
composition for at least 1,000 years has
been established. That such thinking
should lend itself to formalization in
software algorithms was inevitable.
However, Hiller’s work and 1959
Scientific American article17 led to
much controversy and press attention.
Hostility to his achievementsy was
such that the Grove Dictionary of Music
and Musiciansz did not include an ar-
ticle on it until shortly before his death
in 1994. This hostility arose no doubt
more from a misperception of compo-
sitional practice than from anything
intrinsic to Hiller’s work.
Much of the resistance to algorith-
mic composition that persists to this
day stems from the misguided bias that
the computer, not the composer, com-
poses the music. In the vast majority of
cases where the composer is also the
programmer, this is simply not true.
As composer and computer musician
Curtis Roads pointed out more than 15
x To paraphrase Ludger Brümmer, from infor-
mation theory we know that new information
is perceived as chaotic or interesting but not
expressive. New information must be struc-
tured before it can be understood, and, in the
case of aesthetic experience, this structuring
involves comparison to an ideal, or an estab-
lished notion of beauty.7
y Concerning the reaction to The Illiac Suite, Hill-
er said “There was a great [deal] of hostility, cer-
tainly in the musical world...I was immediately
pigeonholed as an ex-chemist who had bungled
into writing music and probably wouldn’t know
how to resolve a dominant seventh chord”; in-
terview with Vincent Plush, 1983.5
z The Grove is the English-speaking world’s
most widely used and arguably most authori-
tative musicological resource.
years ago, it takes a good composer to
design algorithms that result in music
that captures the imagination.34
Furthermore, using algorithmic-
composition techniques does not by ne-
cessity imply less composition work or a
shortcut to musical results; rather, it is a
change of focus from note-to-note com-
position to a top-down formalization of
compositional process. Composition is,
in fact, often slowed by the requirement
that musical ideas be expressed and
their characteristics encapsulated in a
highly structured and non-musical gen-
eral programming language. Learning
the discipline of programming is itself
a time-consuming and, for some com-
posers, an insurmountable problem.
Perhaps counterintuitively, such
formalization of personal composi-
tion technique allows the composer to
proceed from concrete musical or ab-
stract formal ideas into realms hitherto
unimagined, sometimes impossible
to achieve through any other means
than computer software. As composer
Helmut Lachenmann wrote, “A com-
poser who knows exactly what he wants,
wants only what he knows—and that is
one way or another too little.”35 The com-
puter can help composers overcome
recreating what they already know by
aiding more thorough investigations of
the material, once procedures are pro-
grammed, modifications and manipu-
lations are simpler than with pencil and
paper. By “pressing buttons, introduc-
ing coordinates, and supervising the
controls,” to quote Xenakis again,40 the
composer is able to stand back and de-
velop compositional material en masse,
applying procedures and assessing, re-
jecting, accepting, or further processing
results of an often-surprising nature.
Algorithmic composition techniques
clearly further individual musical and
compositional development through
computer programming-enabled voy-
ages of musical discovery.
References
1. ames, C. Stylistic automata in Gradient. Computer
Music Journal 7, 4 (1983), 45–56.
2. assayag, G., Bloch, G., Chemillier, M., Cont, A., and
Dubnov, S. OMax brothers: A dynamic topology of
agents for improvization learning. In Proceedings of the
First ACM Workshop on Audio and Music Computing
Multimedia (Santa Barbara, ca). acM Press, New York,
2006, 125–132.
3. austin, L., Cage, J., and Hiller, L. An interview with John
Cage and Lejaren Hiller. Computer Music Journal 16, 4
(1992), 15–29.
4. Bel, B. Migrating musical concepts: An overview of the Bol
processor. Computer Music Journal 22, 2 (1998), 56–64.
contributed articles
5. Bewley, J. Lejaren A. Hiller: Computer Music Pioneer.
Music Library Exhibit, University of Buffalo, 2004;
http://library.buffalo.edu/libraries/units/music/exhibits/
hillerexhibitsummary.pdf
6. 7. Boulez, P. Schönberg est mort. Score 6 (Feb. 1952), 18–22.
Brümmer, L. Using a digital synthesis language in
composition. Computer Music Journal 18, 4 (1994),
35–46.
8. chomsky, N. Syntactic Structures. Mouton, The Hague,
1957.
9. christensen, E. The Musical Timespace, a Theory of
Music Listening. Aalborg University Press, Aalborg,
Denmark, 1996.
10. cope, D. Experiments in Musical Intelligence. A-R
Editions, Madison, WI, 1996.
11. ebcioglu, K. An expert system for harmonizing four-part
chorales. Computer Music Journal 12, 3 (1988), 43–51.
12. edwards, M. A Pure Data implementation of Ligeti’s
Désordre. Open-source music software; http://www.
michaeledwards.org/software/desordre.zip
13. edwards, M. slippery chicken: A Specialized Algorithmic
Composition Program. Unpublished object-oriented
Common Lisp software; http://www.michael-edwards.
org/slippery-chicken
14. edwards, M. Tramontana. Sheet music, Sumtone, 2004;
http://www.sumtone.com/work.php?workid=101
15. eisen, C. and Keefe, S.P., Eds. The Cambridge Mozart
Encyclopedia. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
England, 2006.
16. the Electronic Music Foundation. HPSCHD; http://
emfnstitute.emf.org/exhibits/hpschd.html
17. hiller, L. Computer music. Scientific American 201, 6
(Dec. 1959), 109–120.
18. holmes, T. Electronic and Experimental Music. T aylor &
Francis Ltd, London, 2003.
19. howat, R. Architecture as drama in late Schubert. In
Schubert Studies, B. Newbould, Ed. Ashgate Press,
London, 1998, 168–192.
20. Jordanous, A. and Smaill, A. Investigating the role of
score following in automatic musical accompaniment.
Journal of New Music Research 38, 2 (2009), 197–209.
21. kinzler, H. and Ligeti, G. Decision and automatism in
Désordre 1er étude, premier livre. Interface, Journal of
New Music Research 20, 2 (1991), 89–124.
22. kirchmeyer, H. On the historical construction of
rationalistic music. Die Reihe 8 (1962), 11–29.
23. koenig, G.M. Project 1; http://home.planet.nl/gkoenig/
indexe.htm
24. koenig, G.M. Aesthetic integration of computer-composer
scores. Computer Music Journal 7, 4 (1983), 27–32.
25. kramer, J. The Fibonacci series in 20th century music.
Journal of Music Theory 17 (1973), 111–148.
26. kunze, T. Désordre (unpublished article); http://www.
fictive.com/t/pbl/1999 desordre/ligeti.html
27. lendvai, E. Bela Bartók: An Analysis of His Music. Kahn
& Averill, London, 1971.
28. lerdahl, F. and Jackendorff, R. A Generative Theory of
Tonal Music. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1983.
29. lewis, G. T oo many notes: Computers, complexity, and
culture in Voyager. Leonardo Music Journal 10 (2000),
33–39.
30. ligeti, G. Über form in der neuen musik. Darmstädter
Beiträge zur neuen Musik 10 (1966), 23–35.
31. 32. Matossian, N. Xenakis. Kahn & Averill, London, 1986.
norden, H. Proportions in music. Fibonacci Quarterly 2,
3 (1964), 219–222.
33. Prusinkiewicz, P. and Lindenmayer, A. The Algorithmic
Beauty of Plants. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1990.
34. roads, C. The Computer Music Tutorial. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA, 1996.
35. ryan, D. and Lachenmann, H. Composer in interview:
Helmut Lachenmann. Tempo 210 (1999), 20–24.
36. sowa, J. A Machine to Compose Music: Instruction Manual
for GENIAC. Oliver Garfield Co., New Haven, ct , 1956.
37. steinitz, R. Music, maths & chaos. Musical Times 137,
1837 (Mar. 1996), 14–20.
38. supper, M. A few remarks on algorithmic composition.
Computer Music Journal 25, 1 (2001), 48–53.
39. Winkler, G.E. Hybrid II: Networks. CD recording, 2003.
sumtone cd1: stryngebite; http://www.sumtone.com/
recording.php?id=17
40. Xenakis, I. Formalized Music. Pendragon, Hillsdale, ny,
1992.
Michael Edwards (michael.edwards@ed.ac.uk) is
a Reader in Music Technology in the School of Arts,
Culture and Environment of the University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, U.K.
© 2011 acM 0001-0782/11/07 $10.00
j u ly 2 0 1 1 | vo l . 5 4 | n o. 7 | c o M M u n I C AT I o ns of t he AC M 67



DigitalCommons@NYLS DigitalCommons@NYLS
Articles & Chapters Faculty Scholarship
2019
“Temporary” Conceptual Art: Property and Copyright, Hopes and
“Temporary” Conceptual Art: Property and Copyright, Hopes and
Prayers
Prayers
Richard H. Chused
Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.nyls.edu/fac_articles_chapters
Part of the Intellectual Property Law Commons
"TEMPORARY" CONCEPTUAL ART: PROPERTY AND
COPYRIGHT, HOPES AND PRAYERS
Richard Chused*
I. IN TR OD U CTION ....................................................................... 2
II. THE STORY OF WALL DRAWING #679 ....................................... 4
III. COPYRIGHT (AND PROPERTY) OR IS IT PROPERTY (AND
C O PYR IGH T)? ..................................
. . .. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . .. . . . 10
A . OWNERSHIP PATTERNS .................................................. 10
B. REFINING AUTHORSHIP OF CONCEPTUAL ART ................ 21
C. DECIDING AUTHORSHIP ................................................. 26
D. OWNERSHIP PATTERNS IN WALL DRAWING #679 AFTER THE
D EA TH OF STE RN .................................................................... 30
IV. INTERESTS IN THE DESTRUCTION, MUTILATION, AND
RESTORATION OF TEMPORARY WORK ..................................... 34
A. CONCEPTUAL ART, OWNERSHIP INTERESTS, TEMPORALITY,
AND RESTORATION ............................................................. 35
B. MORAL RIGHTS: ATTRIBUTION, MUTILATION, DESTRUCTION,
AND RESTORATION ............................................................. 47
1. A TTR IB U TION ............................................................. 50
2. MUTILATION AND ATTRIBUTION OF RESURRECTED
TEMPORARY W ORK ......................................................... 59
*Professor of Law, New York Law School. My artist wife, Elizabeth Langer,
contributed a number of thoughts to me as I worked on this project. As with my
other art-oriented essays, she was my constant muse as well as companion. My
colleagues Jacob Sherkow and Ari Waldman read and commented upon earlier
drafts of this essay. They have my deep gratitude. Their collegiality and generous
expenditures of time reading the work of their colleagues is worth a kudo. A thank
you also is due to New York Law School for providing summer writing grants in
support of my labors. I also am thoroughly delighted that this article is being pub-
lished by a Rutgers-Newark Law School journal. Rutgers-Newark was generous
enough to offer me a teaching job when I first began my career immediately after
completing law school in 1968. Closing the circle is a symbol of my deep grati-
tude for the opportunity the school provided me over half a century ago.
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
3. WORKS IN OR ON BUILDINGS: MUTILATION AND
D ESTR U CTION .............................................. 62
V . C ON CLU SION ................................................. 64
I. INTRODUCTION
This meditation on transitory art begins with Sol LeWitt. His
conceptual art is representative of a large strain of creative endeav-
ors that emerged after 1950. To this day it engages artists, galler-
ists, collectors, and museum curators worldwide. "Ownership" of
his art was not always evidenced by possession of a physical object
like a painting or a sculpture, but by possession of documents-a
certificate of authenticity and a diagram in the case of LeWitt. To-
gether these documents contained (typically partial) instructions on
how to fabricate or install his work. Possession of a certificate and
diagram gave their owner a guarantee of provenance and the au-
thority to arrange for installation of the work with the artist or the
artist's successors in interest-nothing more.' In addition, the actu-
al installations of such works typically were not accomplished by
the artists who made the certificates and diagrams; these installa-
tions were usually completed by others. Whether the installed work
was a wall drawing by LeWitt, a construction by Donald Judd,2 or a
lighting work by Dan Flavin,3 the pieces were often described by
1 See DonaldJudd, GUGGENHEIM,
https://www.guggenheim.org/conservation/the-panza-collection-initiative/donald-
judd (last visited Apr. 13, 2019). Loss of the certificate and diagram, and therefore
of the ability to arrange for installation, can destroy the value of the work. Short
descriptions of problems faced by those who lose certificates are available for
many artists, including Donald Judd and Daniel Flavin. See also Charles & Thom-
as Danziger, When Conceptual Art Certificates ofAuthenticity Go Up in Smoke,
THE BROTHERS IN LAW (Nov. 20, 2015),
https://www.blouinartinfo.com/news/story/1282175/brothers-in-law-when-
conceptual-art-certificates-of
2 See Judd, JUDDFOUNDATION, https://juddfoundation.org/artist/art/ (last
visited Apr. 13, 2019). Some of his conceptual work is described on the website of
the Judd Foundation.
3 See Dan Flavin, Long-term view, Dia:Beacon, DIA ART FOUNDATION,
https://www.diaart.org/program/exhibitions-projects/dan-flavin-collection-display
(last visited Apr. 13, 2019). Some of his more permanent, but easily movable,
work is available at the Dia:Beacon Museum.
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
the artists as temporary, movable, or destructible after their installa-
tion. Such projects were distinctly different from routine art sales
by galleries or auction houses. Rather than obtaining a painting or
sculpture, a buyer obtained only the right to seek its creation and
installation. It was the creative plan that was the artistic product,
not an extant creative work.
The unusual structure of conceptual art endeavors raises a set
of conundrums governing a great deal of contemporary artistic
work. First, what are the property and copyright ownership struc-
tures of a work of conceptual art? Those structures are controlled in
various ways by pulling apart ownership of the certificate and dia-
gram on the one hand and control over installation of a work on the
other. Second, given the divided ownership patterns of much con-
ceptual art, who might be designated as author of a copyrighted
work? That issue also is complicated by the splitting apart of con-
trol over the certificate and diagram from installation of a work.
Additional problems are raised by the fact that such works typically
were and still are installed by persons other than the artist who de-
vised the creation. Does that mean authorship of a copyrighted
work might be split between well-known personages like Sol
LeWitt and those who actually fabricated their creations? Third,
who controls the actual installation of a work-the owner of the
certificate and diagram, the artist or the successors of the artist who
created the certificate and diagram, the craftspeople who actually
do the work, or some combination of people or institutions? This
first family of three problems is discussed in Part II of this essay.
Fourth, who controls maintenance of a work of conceptual art if it
remains in place for a significant period of time, of a work's de-
mise, or, as in the case of LeWitt's Wall Drawing #679 used in this
essay as a template, a plan to restore a work that was covered over?
Are such decisions in the hands of the owners of the physical at-
tributes of an installed work, the owners of the copyright interests
in the work, the craftspeople who originally installed it, or some
combination? This topic is covered in the first section of Part III.
Fifth, given the complex ownership structure and power relation-
ships surrounding a work of conceptual art, what sorts of moral
right issues may surface over the attribution, destruction, or mutila-
tion of a work if some or all of the relevant actors desire to alter,
remove, transfer, or restore a work? The second segment of Part III
takes this up. Finally, if all of those holding an interest of one kind
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
or another in an installed work endeavor to destroy it, are there any
non-legal, ethical considerations that should be applied in deciding
how to handle such decisions? The conclusion tackles this question.
All of these issues are implicated by the story of LeWitt's Wall
Drawing #679-the template for this essay.
II. THE STORY OF WALL DRAWING #679
A peculiar and fascinating example of the property and copy-
right problems embodied in conceptual art works became an object
of widespread discourse in the artistic and museum worlds last
year. A controversy arose over Sol LeWitt's Wall Drawing #679
originally installed during 1991 in the home of William Stem-a
well-known and widely respected Houston architect. The tale, filled
with intriguing questions about the ownership, copyright status,
ethics, and control over the installation, removal, and restoration of
impermanent conceptual art, began in the early 1990s. Stem de-
signed the home pictured below for himself in Houston's Museum
District at 1202 Milford Street-about a twenty-minute walk from
the campus of the city's distinguished Menil Collection.4
While the house was under construction he arranged with Sol
LeWitt to formulate a work, also pictured below, for installation on
a large living room wall thirty feet high and fourteen feet wide.5
The certificate and diagram for the work, denominated as Wall
Drawing #679, were created in 1991 and installation on a wall in
the living room of the new house occurred the same year.6 There
4 See The Alenil Collection, https://www.menil.org/campus (last visited Apr.
13, 2019). The campus includes the main museum building, the famous Rothko
Chapel, buildings devoted to Cy Twombly and Daniel Flavin, a drawing institute,
cafe, a park, and other structures covering a thirty-acre area.
5 See Telephone Interview with Jonna & Georgia Hitchcock (Aug. 1, 2018)
[hereinafter Hitchcock Conversation].
6 See The Alenil Collection, ISSUU (Dec. 21, 2015),
https://issuu.com/themenilcollection/docs/2014-menil-annual-report (The house is
dated on the architectural firm's website as being built in 1992. The wall drawing
is dated a year earlier. Such date differences can be typical for LeWitt's work. The
creation date is when the instruction set was written, not when the work was in-
stalled. In this case the drawing apparently was installed before the house was ful-
ly complete.); see ANNIE BYERLY (ED.), 2014 ANNUAL REPORT: THE MVENIL
COLLECTION 35 (2014). Wall Drawing #679 is listed among the recent acquisitions
of the Menil Collection as created in 1991.
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
also were two working drawings of the piece made before its instal-
lation to assist the artists who installed the work-Patricia Phillips
and Rebecca Schwab.7 Stem was a major patron and a trustee of the
Menil Collection. When he died in 2013 he left his large art collec-
tion, 8 as well as his house, to the museum. And that was when
events took a turn to the viral.
7 See Hitchcock Conversation, supra note 5 (Jonna Hitchcock called them
maquettes in the Hitchcock Conversation); E-mail from David Aylsworth to Rich-
ard Chused (Aug. 24, 2018) ("[W]hile I'm not sure I would really call the studies
that we have here 'maquettes,' there are two diagrams here that were apparently
created by Mr. LeWitt's studio for Mr. Stem to decide which colors he preferred
when he first acquired the work. My understanding is that this type of thing is still
produced today by the studio in order to guide new iterations or acceptable varia-
tions to make the work adjust to a different location. These works are probably not
done by Mr. LeWitt himself, are unsigned, and are not considered by Menil to be
separate works of art in our accessioned permanent collection. Rather, they are
documentation about how the Wall Drawing is to be made.") (on file with author);
E-mail from David Aylsworth to Richard Chused (Aug. 28, 2018) (After he in-
spected the actual certificate and diagram for Wall Drawing #679, he provided the
names of the artisans who are listed as first installing the work in Stem's home.)
(on file with author); Telephone Interview with Aaron Parazette (Oct. 22, 2018)
(That differs some from another report published in 2012 indicating that two Tex-
as artists-Jeff Elrod and Aaron Parazette-were "on the work crew" that did the
work. It is possible, of course, that LeWitt named Phillips and Schwab because
they were the primary artisans. Parazette indicated to me that he only helped pre-
pare the wall for the installation by plastering and painting multiple rolled on lay-
ers. He did not do the actual placement of colors on the wall. Parazette now is a
member of the School of Art faculty at the University of Houston and is represent-
ed by the McClain Gallery in the city.); see Faculty, UNIVERSITY OF
HOUSTON, https://ssl.uhedu/class/art/undergraduate-programs/Painting/Faculty/
(last visited Apr. 13, 2019); see Aaron Parazette, MCCLAIN GALLERY,
http://www.mcclaingallery.com/artists/aaron-parazette (last visited Apr. 13, 2019).
8 BYERLY, supra note 6, at 32-41. Dozens of works are listed as newly ac-
quired from the estate by the museum in its 2014 Annual Report.
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
tiam 3tem r-ouse ,1 Wall Drawing #679 in Stem
House 10
Rather than convert the Stem house and its large art collection
into an adjunct space of the Menil Collection, the museum elected
to move all of the portable art into its primary facility a short dis-
tance away and sell the dwelling. At that point, the museum had to
determine what, if anything, to do with the wall drawing in place in
the living room. The museum elected to cover it up and end the vis-
ible life of Wall Drawing #679.
The home was purchased by Dr. Georgia Hitchcock in 2014.
She and her daughter Jonna knew about the existence of the wall
drawing for quite some time after the purchase but made no efforts
to learn about its condition for several years. A friend of the Hitch-
cocks then suggested that they dampen some of the wall and see if
they could remove the material hiding the drawing. They discov-
ered that the covering was composed only of a thin water-soluble
skim-coat of sheetrock-mud or plaster. When damp it was easy to
9 William Stern House, STERN AND BUCEK ARCHITECTS,
http://stembucek.com/residential/william-stem-house (last visited Apr. 13, 2019).
The image can be located on the architecture firm website.
10 See Julia Halperin, One Texas Woman's Paradoxical and Controversial
Quest to Prove She Rediscovered a Major Work of Conceptual Art, ARTNET NEWS
(Jan. 18, 2018), https://news.artnet.com/art-world/sol-lewitt-drawing-menil-texas-
1201514 (depicting Paul Hester of Hester + Harway's picture of Wall Drawing
#679 in Stem House).
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
scrape away. As seen below, a scraggly line of it was removed. To
their surprise the work was quite visible underneath; the drawing
had not been painted over before the skim-coat was applied. The
Hitchcock family then decided to arrange for the work to be re-
stored and to create a documentary about the effort." Word got out
and controversy ensued.' 2 Some contended that the Hitchcocks had
every right to do as they pleased; others opined that the life of the
LeWitt work was over and they should let it rest in peace.
" Un-Erasing Sol LeWitt, http://unerasingsollewitt.com/ (last visited Feb. 17,
2019). A trailer for the documentary of this project is also available on this web-
site.
12 See, e.g., HALPERIN, supra note 10 (Roy Nolen, executor of Bill Stem's es-
tate, says he was "quite certain that he would feel that his legacy and reputation
were being exploited for personal gain by the so-called 'unerasing' documentary
proposed by representatives of the current owner of the house he built and
loved."); see also How the 30-Ft. -Tall Ghost of a Sol LeWitt Drawing Is
Slowly Reappearing in Houston's Museum District, SWAMPLOT (Jan. 5,
2018), http://swamplot.com/how-the-30-ft-tall-ghost-of-a-sol-lewitt-drawing-is-
slowly-reappearing-in-houstons-museum-district/2018-01-05/ (referring to the
piece as a "zombie LeWitt drawing."); Lynn Steen, Comment to Disappeared
Sol LeWitt Painting Slowly Reappears in Houston Home, GLASSTIRE (Jan. 9,
2018), http://glasstire. com/2018/0 1/09/disappeared-sol-lewitt-painting-slowly-
reappears-in-houston-home/#comment- 1375678 ("Whatever you choose to call
that which remains under the sheetrock mud and paint, is what the homeowner
will have when they are finished. A 'not-LeWitt' or an 'un-LeWitt' or an 'Uner-
ased Sol LeWitt' (with a nod and wink to Rauschenberg)."); Paula Newton, TWhy
"Unerasing" a Sol LeWitt is Impossible, GLASSTIRE (Jan. 11, 2018),
http://glasstire.com/2018/01/1 1/update-why-unerasing-a-sol-lewitt-is-impossible/
(The Menil Collection says "the artistic creation is in the design... [and] [t]he
work is ephemeral ... despite the homeowners' many chronicles of the 'uneras-
ing' on a variety of social media platforms, they are really just messing up a per-
fectly good wall."); but see Isaac Kaplan, A Houston Homeowner Is Uncovering A
Painted-Over Sol Lewitt On Her Wall But She Doesn't Own It, ARTSY (Jan. 16,
2018), https://www.artsy.net/article/artsy-editorial-houston-homeowner-
uncovering-painted-over-sol-lewitt-wall ("[T]he Menil said it does not take issue
with the homeowner doing whatever projects they wish to undertake in their
home.").
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
kreailea to Jonna r1-IlcncoCK
The scraggly, scraped off segment of sheetrock is
visible in this image inside the red rectangle. 3
While the family was considering how to proceed they contact-
ed the Menil Collection to learn what the museum's position was
about ownership and recovery of the hidden wall drawing. Jonna
Hitchcock, daughter of the homeowner, received an email from
David Aylsworth, the Menil Collection's Registrar.14 He wrote:
As I am sure you are aware, LeWitt's wall drawings are de-
signed to be temporary, challenging the idea of permanence that so
much of the art world is based on. The owner of one of his wall
drawings does not own anything tangible. Rather, when he ac-
quired the drawing, William Stem purchased the use of an idea.
The idea was then executed by craftspeople overseen by the artist's
studio and entrusted to carry out the idea satisfactorily.
The drawing lives on only as a certificate of authenticity and
diagram that transferred to the Menil as part of his bequest. LeWitt
likened his wall drawing to a musical score. The artistic creation
was in the design. The execution depended on talented craftspeople
13 Un-Erasing Sol Le Mitt, supra note 11.
14 The job of a "registrar" varies some from museum to museum. But in the
general the position tasks may include control over movement of the collection,
records for the various works in the museum, preservation and maintenance of the
works, provenance, and other data about the collection.
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
who take the design and adapt it to specific structural circumstanc-
es, under the supervision of the artist's studio (and now his estate).
By design, they were intended to be on view for an undefined and
temporary period of time, painted over, re-created and re-
configured by the owner of the diagram and certificate (in conjunc-
tion with the artist's estate) in different locations and at different
times. When ownership of Wall Drawing #679 transferred to the
Men Collection, we became its caretaker. When we ceased to own
the wall and the house it previously existed in, and could no longer
be in control of its environment, it was painted over and its physi-
cal life came to an end. This was always the intent of the artist, and
is the standard procedure when these works change ownership.
While we have not had the opportunity to re-configure or re-
construct the piece, it still exists as a concept and idea. On the at-
tached report it is represented as a tangible object and wall in Mr.
Stem's house. But the artwork itself is the intangible idea repre-
sented by the directives that passed to the Menil with the bequest of
his collection. 5
His representations that the work was "painted over" and that
"its physical life came to an end" were not entirely accurate. In ad-
dition, the opinions that the work was intended by all involved to
be visible for "a temporary period of time" and that its demise upon
sale of the house "was always the intent of the artist" were contest-
ed. The Hitchcocks questioned that line of argument, noting among
other things that many chats they had with friends of William
Stem, neighbors, and architects revealed a widespread sense that
Stem would be surprised by both the sale of his house and the cov-
ering over of Wall Drawing #679; they also wondered why Stem
and LeWitt bothered to retouch the piece after about ten years to
make sure it was true to the initial conception. It is, of course, true
that some of LeWitt's wall drawings have been visible in museums
or other locations for many years without being disturbed. 16 But
15 Email from David Aylsworth to Jonna Hitchcock (Jan. 4, 2018), attached
to an email from Tommy Napier, Assistant Director of Communications of the
Menil Collection, to Michael Roffer, Associate Librarian and Professor of Legal
Research, New York Law School (Apr. 9, 2018) (on file with author). The "at-
tached report" mentioned in the email was the 2014 annual report for the museum.
See BYERLY, supra note 6.
16 See, e.g., Sol LeFTittlA Wall Drawing Retrospective, MASS MoCA,
https://MASS MoCA.org/event/sol-lewitt-a-wall-drawing-retrospective/ (last visit-
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
Aylsworth's other positions were based not on the physical status
of the drawing or disputes about the background of the work, but
on more theoretical ideas about conceptual art-that the certificate
was evidence only of ownership of the certificate itself, together
with the accompanying diagram, that a tangible wall drawing was a
"LeWitt" only if it was drawn or maintained with permission of
LeWitt or his estate, that Stem may have hoped the work would
endure but he held no interest in the creation after his death, and
that the Hitchcocks may have owned the markings on the wall un-
der the skim-coat but they did not own a "LeWitt." What is the best
way to parse the varying opinions about the propriety of restoring
Wall Drawing #679?
III. COPYRIGHT (AND PROPERTY) OR IS IT PROPERTY (AND
COPYRIGHT)?
A. OWNERSHIP PATTERNS
The journey begins with exposition of the property and copy-
right structure of works of conceptual art like those of Sol LeWitt.
When he "sold" a work he, like other conceptual artists, did not al-
ways sell a physical copy of a two- or three-dimensional work. Ra-
ed Feb. 17, 2019). The LeWitt installation at MASS MoCA originally installed in
2007 remains intact and is scheduled to continue until 2033. See also John Hogan
& Carol Snow, Sol LeWitt's Wall Drawings: Conservation of an EphemeralArt
Practice, 22 OBJECTS SPECIALTY GROUP POSTPRINTS 37, 41 (2015),
http://resources.conservation-us.org/wp-content//uploads/sites/8/2015/05/osg022-
04.pdf (last visited Feb. 17, 2019). John Hogan is the Mary Jo and Ted Shen In-
stallations Director and Archivist for Sol LeWitt Wall Drawings at the Yale Uni-
versity Art Gallery. He is a leading figure in the LeWitt world. Carol Snow is
Deputy Chief Conservator and the Alan J. Dworsky Senior Conservator of Objects
at the Yale University Art Gallery. MASS MoCA's LeWitt exhibition is quite ex-
tensive, occupying all 27,000 square feet of Building No. 7 on the large MASS
MoCA campus in North Adams, Massachusetts. The museum worked directly
with LeWitt shortly before he died to design the exhibition spaces and install the
works. See also NYCSUBWAY, https://www.nycsubway.org/perl/artwork, (last vis-
ited Feb. 17, 2019) (These works, like the wall covered with tile in the Columbus
Circle station of the New York City subway system, are long lasting. The MTA
maintains a list of art in the subway system.); NYCSUBWAY,
https://www.nycsubway.org/wiki/Artwork:_Whirls and Twirls_(Sol Lewitt) (last
visited Feb. 17, 2019) (to view the LeWitt piece Whirls and Twirls, which was
installed in 2007.)
20191
"TEMPORARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
ther he transferred a certificate of authenticity and a diagram with
basic instructions for how to make and install the work. It is not en-
tirely clear when LeWitt began to formalize sales of his works in
this way. In the 198 0s he did replace some early documentation for
the large conceptual art collection of Giuseppe Panza, a significant
part of which is now held by the Guggenheim Foundation. 17 But he
and other artists began to remove some of the ambiguity in the na-
ture of their authentication and sale process beginning in the 1970s,
though not without some notable conflicts with those who had pre-
viously purchased unfabricated works with ambiguous or nonexist-
ent documentation.' 8
A typical certificate of authenticity and diagram for a LeWitt
wall drawing-in this case one owned by the Tate Gallery in Lon-
don-is pictured below.' 9 As is evident from the certificate's 1970
date LeWitt was an early, archetypical formulator of certificates
and diagrams for the transfer and authentication of conceptual two-
dimensional art.2 0 The primary certificate clause for The Tate's
Wall Drawing #49 reads, "This certificate is the signature for the
wall drawing and must accompany the wall drawing if it is sold or
otherwise transferred.",2 ' It appears to say, "Congratulations, this
17See The Panza Collection, GUGGENHEIM MUSEUM,
https://www.guggenheim.org/artwork/special collection/the-panza-collection (last
visited Feb. 17, 2019); see also Giuseppe Panza Papers, 1956-1990, GETTY
MUSEUM,
http://archives2.getty.edu:8082/xtf/view?docld=ead/940004/940004.xml;query=;b
rand=default (last visited Feb. 17, 2019). Panza's papers are held at the Getty Mu-
seum in Los Angeles; see also Eileen Kinsella, The Guggenheim Gets $750, 000
To Help Answer Knotty, Existential Questions About The Nature Of Conceptual
Art, ARTNET (Aug. 29, 2018), https://news.artnet.com/art-world/guggenheim-
museum-gets-750k-mellon-grant-1339031. Noting the Guggenheim is undertaking
a massive effort to authenticate and document a large portion of the 350 item Pan-
za Collection it now owns.
18 See Martha Buskirk, Public ExperiencelPrivate Authority, 26 CORNELL J.
L. &PUB. POL'Y 469, 473 (2017); MARTHABUSKIRK, THE CONTINGENT OBJECT OF
CONTEMPORARY ART 35-43 (2003).
19 A Wall Divided Vertically into Fifteen Equal Parts, Each with a Different
Line Direction and Colour, andAll Combinations, TATE,
http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/lewitt-a-wall-divided-vertically-into-fifteen-
equal-parts-each-with-a-different-line-t0 1766 (last visited Feb. 17, 2019).
20 See HOGAN & SNOW, supra note 16, at 39.
21 Wall Drawing #1136, TATE (Aug. 2004),
https://www.tate.org.ukllartlartworksllewitt-wall-drawing-1136-arOO165.
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
document suffices as a signature for a non-existent work of art that
will be based on this certificate that I will claim copyright in upon
installation. Enjoy it." And things get even stranger in another
standard clause contained in the diagram stating: "This is a diagram
for the Sol LeWitt wall drawing number 49. It should accompany
the certificate if the wall drawing is sold or otherwise transferred
but is not a certificate or a drawing.'
"22 While the certificate and di-
agram do contain instructions of a sort 23 for installation of the
work, they also make quite clear that they are not the actual work.24
In essence, it says, "Congratulations again. Here are some instruc-
tions for installing a not yet extant work. Since I hold the copyright
in the certificate and instructions, contact me if you'd like to actual-
ly implement them. Maybe we can work something out. Have a
2 5
nice day. "
22 Id.
23 1 equivocate because LeWitt and other conceptual artists sometimes made
or had made working drawings for use by the artisans actually installing a work
before they began the project. These drawings might contain more precise indica-
tions about how to proceed or reflect the actual dimensions of the wall where the
drawing was going to be installed.
24 A picture of the actual work during a period when it was visible at the Tate
Gallery during 2000 may be found in Anna Lovatt, Ideas in Transmission:
LeWitt's Wall Drawings and the Question of Medium, TATE PAPERS (2010),
https://www.tate.org.uk/research/publications/tate-papers/14/ideas-in-
transmission-lewitt-wall-drawings-and-the-question-of-medium.
25 This is me chatting. I certainly am not suggesting that this sort of language
was used by LeWitt. From the many people I have talked to in the course of writ-
ing this project, it appears he was known as a nice person who routinely helped
other artists.
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
It is obvious that the meanings of these clauses are puzzling at
best and totally obscure at worst, at least for most people. Why
should anyone want to buy such a non-existent thing? While the
certificate guarantees the authenticity of the work, that authenticity
seems to refer directly only to the certificate and its accompanying
diagram. There certainly is no guarantee that Wall Drawing #49 ac-
tually existed when the certificate was drafted; quite the contrary.
All that appeared to be required was that the certificate and dia-
gram switched hands when they were transferred. Neither sentence
clearly says anything about the authenticity or ownership of an in-
stalled version of the wall drawing or about the process required for
arranging installation.26 It is clear from the standardized nature of
the documents, however, that Sol LeWitt (and later his estate after
his death in 2007) held the copyright in the certificate and diagram
for Wall Drawing #49, as well as for Wall Drawing #679 at the
Stem manse. There is no doubt that LeWitt gave approval to install
the latter drawing in Houston in 1991.27
And the narrative becomes even more perplexing. It should be
clear by now that this sort of artistic genre is not easily encom-
passed within traditional concepts of property or copyright law.
Though contemporary property theorists typically think of real or
personal property law as a set of relational rules about things or in-
tangible products based on personal preferences, organizational in-
tentions, exercise of political or social power, or societal needs, 2s
26 A similar method of transferring conceptual art was used by Felix Gonza-
lez-Torres, well known for placing stacks of various items on the floor of a muse-
um or gallery and inviting viewers to take them. The objects included sheets of
paper with sometimes cryptic phrases on them or wrapped candies intended to be
opened and eaten. The stacks were supplemented as they were reduced in size. See
Joan Kee, Felix Gonzalez-Torres on Contracts, 26 CORNELL J.L. & PUB. POL'Y
517, 418 (2017); see also Gregory S. Alexander, Objects of Art; Objects of Prop-
erty, 26 CORNELL J.L. & PUB. POL'Y 461, 461 (2017) (discussing ways in which
such transactions conflict with traditional notions of contract and property law).
27 See Tyler Rudick, Houston Architect's Towering Sol Lewitt Installation is
a Piece ofAmerican Art History, CULTURE MAP (Nov. 11, 2012, 4:16 PM),
http://houston.culturemap.com/news/home-design/1 1-09-12-20-57-houston-
architect-opens-his-home -to-share -a-piece-of-american-art-history/ (discussing
much of the story of the work's installation).
28 See Kenneth J. Vandevelde, The New Property of the Nineteenth Century:
The Development of the Modern Concept of Property, 29 BUFF. L. REv. 325, 325
(1980) (discussing the idea of property as relational);see also Morris R. Cohen,
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
LeWitt described his work as simply ideational and totally non-
physical. 29 The "work," if you will, was the concept embedded in
the instruction set used later to make it sensate. Copyright law is
certainly thought of as "intellectual" property, but it is not solely
ideational. Indeed, ideas are not copyrightable at all.30 Only origi-
nal creations fixed in a "tangible medium of expression" are pro-
tected.3' If LeWitt just crafted ideas to be executed by others, he
could claim nothing under copyright law. But it is likely that
LeWitt's formulation of "idea" was quite distinct from its use in
copyright law. LeWitt thought of his creations as more like a blue-
print-a plan of action-rather than a completed project. And
blueprints in the world of architecture are copyrightable as graphic
works if original.3 2 Copyright law uses "idea" to connote some-
thing so basic to human communication, discourse, and thoughtful-
ness that it should not be surrounded with property like protections.
To allow anyone to own an idea, the thinking goes, would under-
mine social and political discourse in destructive ways. That is why
copyright is said to cover expression of ideas rather than ideas
themselves. The expression, if original, may be subject to protec-
tion; the underlying idea will not. 33
But even if one of LeWitt's diagrams, together with its certifi-
cate, is expressive-and original-enough in copyright terms to
justify the award of legal protection, that prize extends to LeWitt or
Property and Sovereignty, 13 CORNELL L. REv. 8, 8 (1927) (discussing and con-
firming the declaration that property is about power).
29 See Sol LeWitt, Paragraphs on Conceptual Art, 5 ARTFORUM No. 10 (June
1967), https://www.comer-
college.com/udb/cproVozeFxParagraphson Conceptual Art. Sol leWitt.pdf.
30 See 17 U.S.C. § 102(b) (2018).
31 17 U.S.C. § 102(a) (2018); Bakerv. Selden, 101 U.S. 99, 99 (1897). The
idea/expression dichotomy is one of the most ineffable in copyright law. Problem
examples are legion. What, for example, is John Cage's 4'33" -a "musical" com-
position consisting of silence "emanating" from one or more musicians for four
minutes and thirty-three seconds? Is it ideational or expressive? Or is there a dif-
ference between a blank canvas purchased by an artist at an art supply store and
that same object hung on the wall of a museum and entitled "Blank Canvas #1 in
Ecru?".
32 See 17 U.S.C. § 101 (2018) (defining "pictorial, graphic, sculptural work"
to include "architectural plans").
33 See Bleisteinv. Donaldson Lithographing Co., 188 U.S. 239, 239 (1903);
see also Baker v. Selden, 101 U.S. 99, 99 (1879); Nichols v. Universal Pictures
Corp., 45 F.2d 119, 119 (2d Cir. 1930).
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
his successor in interest for a wall drawing or three-dimensional
structure executed by others only if the visible version is deemed a
"copy" or a "derivative work" of the instruction set.34 Not surpris-
ingly, copyright holders have the right to control the making of
copies of their works or the derivative reuse of significant portions
of their work. 35 Since installed drawings typically are not dupli-
cates of a certificate and a diagram, they are not copies but deriva-
tive works-expressive items that, in the language of the statute,
are based on the original but have "recast, transformed, or adapted"
it.36 Copyright owners-such as LeWitt as the holder of the intel-
lectual property interests in certificates and diagrams-retained the
exclusive right to license the making of such derivative works. But
those crafting the derived creation of an installed drawing with
permission hold another copyright in the new material they added
to the original.
This division of authority between the "owner" of a certificate
and diagram, the "owner" of the copyright in the certificate and di-
agram, and the "owner" of the new material in the installed dia-
gram can create some deceptively strange results. On its face, the
copyright statute makes a firm distinction between ownership of a
physical copy of a work and ownership of the copyright in the
work. The former involves control over a physical copy of a work;
the latter speaks to control over the non-physical, intellectual prop-
erty rights in a work. 17 U.S.C. § 202 provides:
Ownership of a copyright, or of any of the exclu-
sive rights under a copyright, is distinct from own-
ership of any material object in which the work is
14 See 17 U.S.C. § 101 (2018) ("Copies are material objects... in which a
work is fixed by any method now known or later developed, and from which the
work can be perceived, reproduced, or otherwise communicated, either directly or
with the aid of a machine or device. The term "copies" includes the material ob-
ject, other than a phonorecord, in which the work is first fixed .... A 'derivative
work' is a work based upon one or more preexisting works, such as a translation,
musical arrangement, dramatization, fictionalization, motion picture version,
sound recording, art reproduction, abridgment, condensation, or any other form in
which a work may be recast, transformed, or adapted. A work consisting of edito-
rial revisions, annotations, elaborations, or other modifications which, as a whole,
represent an original work of authorship, is a "derivative work.").
3 See 17 U.S.C. § 106 (2018).
36 17 U.S.C. § 101 (2018).
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
embodied. Transfer of ownership of any material
object, including the copy or phonorecord in
which the work is first fixed, does not of itself
convey any rights in the copyrighted work embod-
ied in the object; nor, in the absence of an agree-
ment, does transfer of ownership of a copyright or
of any exclusive rights under a copyright convey
property rights in any material object.37
Accordingly, when an artist creates a traditional two-dimensional
work on canvas and sells it, ownership of the "material object"-
the painting in this traditional setting-passes to the buyer. The art-
ist loses her right to control sale or other disposition of the object.3 "
Ownership of the copyright in the painting, however, is retained by
the artist in the absence of a second contract transferring some or
all of the intellectual property rights to the purchaser.39 The physi-
cal and intellectual interests in the work are split in two. In addi-
tion, the owner of the copyright in a pictorial, graphic, or sculptural
work has the exclusive right "to display the work publicly."4 ° That
right, however, is subject to an important exception allowing "the
owner of a particular copy lawfully made under this title ... to dis-
play that copy publicly ... to viewers present at the place where
the copy is located."' This works as expected with a standard, tra-
ditionally made, two or three-dimensional work of art. The owner
of the physical copy may display it where it is kept or on loan but
may not make copies of it and sell them.
Do these rules work as many art lovers expect in the case of a
conceptual art work by LeWitt, Flavin, Judd or any other similarly
creative soul? What were the consequences of Sol LeWitt transfer-
ring to William Stem the tactile certificate and diagram associated
with Wall Drawing #679 in the early 1990s? Under Section 202,
" 17 U.S.C. § 202 (2018).
38 See 17 U.S.C. § 109 (2018) ("[T]he owner of a particular copy... lawfully
made under this title.., is entitled, without the authority of the copyright owner,
to sell or otherwise dispose of the possession of that copy[.]" This is commonly
known as the "first sale" rule).
'9 Transfers of exclusive rights in a copyright require a writing. See 17 U.S.C.
§ 204 (2018).
40 17 U.S.C § 106(5) (2018).
41 17 U.S.C. § 109(c) (2018).
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
Stem owned the physical pieces of paper-the certificate and dia-
gram-but not the copyright in either of them.4 2 If a copyright ex-
isted it was retained by LeWitt. As with the documentation for The
Tate Modem's Wall Drawing #49 displayed earlier, 43 there surely
is a copyright notice in LeWitt's name on the certificates he com-
monly used. And the diagram noted that it must accompany the cer-
tificate; the two documents were tightly linked together. Neither the
certificate nor the diagram, according to the express provisions they
contained, was a "wall drawing." That item may not have actually
existed at the time the certificate and diagram were transferred to
Stem. 44 There could not be a copyright in such a drawing until it
was placed on a wall; perhaps it was only a hope and a prayer at the
point of transfer. Since copyright subsists only in "original works
of authorship fixed in any tangible medium of expression, ' no in-
tellectual property rights could exist in a wall drawing when only
the certificate and diagram were conveyed. And a copyright may
exist in the certificate and diagram only if together they constitute
"original expression. "46
"Ownership" of a LeWitt work purchased from the artist, there-
fore, did not mean that a wall drawing could be displayed solely at
the behest of the owner of the certificate and diagram at the place
where the certificate and diagram were located. The certificate and
diagram could be displayed by the owner of the pieces of paper at
the place they were located, but permission of the artist or the art-
ist's successor copyright owner was required before a wall drawing
could be installed in accordance with the instructions in and copy-
42 The presence of a copyright notice on the certificate does not alter this con-
clusion; it only confirms it. And if the certificate and diagram are considered part
of the same copyrightable entity the single notice suffices for both. Notice is no
longer required to create a copyright in the United States. It may change certain
remedies if present.
41 See supra p. 5 (the certificate).
44 See supra note 7. Since those installing the drawing in Stem's home-- Pa-
tricia Phillips and Rebecca Schwab-are listed on the certificate it is possible that
the documentation and drawing were crafted in the same time frame.
45 17 U.S.C. § 102 (2018).
46 Since the originality hurdle is quite low, this usually is not a problem with
conceptual art works like those of LeWitt. See 17 U.S.C. § 102 (2018); see gener-
ally Burow-Giles Lithographic Co. v. Sarony, 111 U.S. 53 (1884); Bleisteinv.
Donaldson Lithographing Co., 188 U.S. 239 (1903); Feist Publ'ns, Inc. v. Rural
Tel. Serv. Co., 499 U.S. 340 (1991).
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
right ownership of a certificate and diagram. This may strike many
as out of sync with the expectations of those drafting the copyright
code. But in the LeWitt setting the "owner" of the "wall drawing"
evidenced only by possession of the certificate and diagram did not
obtain an automatic right to display an actual wall drawing. It was
not "located" anywhere at any particular moment; it didn't exist un-
til it was installed. It also would be perfectly legitimate that ver-
sions of a wall drawing could be installed in various places over
time, provided that permissions were obtained. While we might ex-
pect that the owner of a certificate and diagram had the right to in-
stall and display the wall drawing at the place where the certificate
and diagram were kept, that right was only a hope and a prayer that
arrangements could successfully be made with LeWitt (or now
LeWitt's estate) to have it installed. If a wall drawing is installed
today without permission of the estate, it is not a "LeWitt;" it is just
some random marks on a wall, or an infringement of a copyright
held by LeWitt or the LeWitt Estate in the certificate and diagram!
Indeed, the possibility that those random marks on a wall made
without permission of LeWitt or of the LeWitt Estate may be an in-
fringement should be taken seriously. The certificate and diagram
for Wall Drawing #49 printed above,47 for example, are owned by
their possessor, The Tate Modem in London, and they may be dis-
played there. But if The Tate hired an artisan on its own this year to
install the drawing on a wall without the permission of the LeWitt
Estate, the museum would most likely be authorizing the making of
a derivative work of the certificate and diagram for that work and
displaying it publicly without permission of the copyright owner. 48
Today the installation of a wall drawing typically is done not only
with the permission of the LeWitt Estate, but also with artisans au-
thorized by the estate to do the work.49 While LeWitt was alive he
47 See supra p. 5.
48 An installation is almost surely a "derivative work." See 17 U.S.C. § 101
and accompanying text. It typically does not look at all like an enlarged version of
the diagram, but surely is derived from it.
49 See E-mail from Steven Henry, Paula Cooper Gallery, to Richard Chused
(July 9, 2018) (on file with author). In some cases volunteers help out. The most
recent example I know of was at the Yale Art Museum's installation of Wall
Drawing #1180. See a brief video and explanation at Yale (@Yale), INSTAGRAM,
https://www.instagram.com/p/Bc8AgT8lGaF/?hl=en (last visited Feb. 17, 2019).
But note that it was overseen by John Hogan, Installation Director and Archivist,
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
apparently sought out those who originally installed a drawing to
rejuvenate it every ten to twenty years if it was on display for a
long time. 0 As a practical matter, therefore, the right to make a
copy or derivative work by installation resides not only with the
owner of the physical pieces of paper labeled as a certificate and a
diagram but also with the holder of the copyright in those items-
now the LeWitt Estate. Since the possessor of the documents has
monopoly-like control over access to them, the wall drawing may
not be installed without cooperation of the owner of the papers.
That possessory interest in the certificate and diagram is therefore
valuable-quite valuable in the case of someone as well known as
LeWitt. Without it the work may become virtually worthless-
unauthentic as a practical matter.5 ' But the owner of the certificate
and diagram has a property like "future interest" only in the poten-
tiality of the actual wall drawing. The owner of the certificate and
diagram needs permission of the copyright owner in the certificate
and diagram to actually execute a wall drawing.52 While the Tate,
as possessor of the certificate and diagram for #49, may prohibit a
party desiring to do an installation simply because it controls access
to the documents, the museum itself may not claim to have created
a LeWitt wall drawing if they install it on their own. Instead they
would be violating the rights of the very person (or successor)
whose work they own. We have come full circle. "Owning" a
LeWitt means only that you have the unique "right" to seek per-
Sol LeWitt Archive, Yale University Art Gallery. See id. The huge MASS MoCA
exhibition of LeWitt wall drawings was installed over a six-month period by a
team of twenty-two people-some long-time installers and others from local art
schools. See also SOL LEWITT, supra note 16.
50 See From Fruit to Frozen Blood 7 Issues in the Conservation of Contem-
poraryArt, CHRISTIE'S (May 25, 2015), https://www.christies.com/features/From-
fruit-to-frozen-blood-7-tricky-issues-in-the-conservation-of-Contemporary-Art-
6123-1.aspx.
51 See Steinkamp v. Hoffman, No. 0651770, 2012 WL 1941149 (N.Y.Sup.Ct.
May 22, 2012). Allegations that a gallery lost a LeWitt certificate and diagram for
Wall Drawing #448 led to a lawsuit in 2012. The case never went to trial; it appar-
ently was settled. See Dr. Derek Fincham, How Law Defines Art, 14 J.
MARSHALL REV. INTELL. PROP. L. 314, 322 (2015). It is apparently common
for those purchasing a LeWitt to leave the papers in the custody of a gallery for
safekeeping. That process apparently went awry here.
52 As far as I know neither LeWitt nor his estate has simply refused to allow
the holder of a certificate and diagram to undertake an installation under any cir-
cumstance. That would create intriguing litigation prospects.
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
mission from the LeWitt Estate to install it. The "deal," as it were,
requires a three-party arrangement between the owner of the certif-
icate and diagram, the LeWitt Estate, and the individual or individ-
uals actually crafting its installation. And, nothing will happen
without the expenditure of funds by the owner of the certificate and
diagram to arrange and pay for a space to install the work and to
pay the fees of the artisans doing the work.
That is born out in reality at some museum websites. The Dia
Foundation that runs the renowned Dia:Beacon Museum of con-
temporary art north of New York City owns several LeWitt certifi-
cates and diagrams. The web pages displaying images of the pieces
as drawn on walls at the museum are always accompanied by a
copyright notice in the name of "The LeWitt Estate, Artists Rights
Society, New York," along with statements that the works (that is,
the certificates and diagrams) were obtained as gifts from the artist.
The Museum of Modern Art site is similar. Comparable practices
have been described to me by various museum and gallery offi-
cials. 5 3 The web site of MASS MoCA (Massachusetts Museum of
Contemporary Art), an equally renowned museum of contemporary
art, is strangely silent about the copyright status of works now on
display in a huge exhibition of LeWitt wall drawings installed over
a decade ago.54
5' Telephone Conversation with Steven Henry, Senior Director at the Paula
Cooper Gallery in New York City, an agent for Sol LeWitt's estate (July 2, 2018).
51 See, e.g., Wall Drawing #411B, DIA,
https://www.diaart.org/collection/collection/lewitt-sol-wall-drawing-41 lb-
isometric-figure-with-progressively-darker-gradations-of-gray-ink-wash-on-each-
plane-1984-2003-169/keyword/lewitt# (last visited Feb. 17, 2019); see also Wall
Drawing # 1085, DIA https://www.diaart.org/collection/collection/lewitt-sol-wall-
drawing- 1085-drawing-seriescomposite-part-iiv- 124-ab-l 968-1968-2003 -
168/keyword/lewitt (last visited Feb. 17, 2019); see also Wall Drawing #411D,
DIA https://www.diaart.org/collection/collection/lewitt-sol-wall-drawing-41 ld-
isometric-figure-with-progressively-darker-gradations-of-gray-ink-wash-on-each-
plane-1984-2003 -170/keyword/lewitt (last visited Feb. 17, 2019); Wall Drawing
41 IE, DIA, https://www.diaart.org/collection/collection/lewitt-sol-wall-drawing-
41 le-isometric-figure-with-progressively-darker-gradations-of-gray-ink-wash-on-
each-plane-2003-2003 -171/keyword/lewitt, (last visited Feb. 17, 2019); see, e.g.
Wall Drawing #260, MOMA https://www.moma.org/calendar/exhibitions/305,
(last visited Feb. 17, 2019). The status of the wall drawings on display at MASS
MoCA is left open. The owners of the works are provided, but there are no copy-
right notices. See Sol Lewitt: A Wall Drawing Retrospective, MOCA https://MASS
MoCA.org/sol-lewitt/ (last visited Feb. 17, 2019).
20191
"TEMPORARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
Needless to say, the division of legal authority between owners
of certificates and diagrams on the one hand and owners of copy-
rights in them on the other has led to some major controversies.
Lack of documentation or confusing phraseology in their terms, es-
pecially early in the history of this genre of work, has led to prob-
lems. A number of them involving works by Carl Andre, Donald
Judd, and Dan Flavin, among others, are well documented in Mar-
tha Buskirk's important volume on the history and culture of such
artists-THE CONTINGENT OBJECT OF CONTEMPORARY ART 55-
published in 2003. Many involved pieces in the large conceptual art
collection of Giuseppe Panza. His efforts to control installation of
works or fabricate them on his own initiative, sometimes in cases
lacking any documentation, led to conflicts with living artists. It is
not surprising, therefore, that documents such as those used by
LeWitt emerged in this artistic arena.56
B. REFINING AUTHORSHIP OF CONCEPTUAL ART
Exposition of the property and copyright conundrums is not yet
complete. The legal structure has additional complexities! As pre-
viously noted, LeWitt and other conceptual artists did not typically
intend to install their own creations. Rather, the instructions in the
certificate and diagram were to be used by those bringing the con-
ceptual art work to fruition. LeWitt's initial forays into this realm
involved three-dimensional "structures." He first exhibited them at
the Daniels Gallery in New York in 1965. 57 Three years later he
began to exhibit two-dimensional "wall drawings." While LeWitt
55 See MARTHA BUSKIRK, THE CONTINGENT OBJECT OF CONTEMPORARY ART
21-56 (2003).
56 See Zod Lescaze, How Does a Museum Buy an Artwork That Doesn't
Physically Exist?, THE NEW YORK TIMES (Nov. 8, 2018),
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/11/08/t-magazine/tino-sehgal-hirshhom-museum-
art. html (some still do not seem to grasp, or perhaps to care about, the complexi-
ties of the copyright issues at stake in this sort of genre. The Hirschhorn Museum
and Sculpture Garden recently purchased a Tono Sehgal performance art work
lacking any documentation at all. Ah, what will the future hold?).
57 See NICHOLAS BAUME, RELATED TO STRUCTURES 15 (Nicholas Baume ed.,
2011). This book contains essays and images related to the Public Art Fund's large
retrospective installation of a number of structures in City Hall Park in New York
in 2008.
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
personally rendered his first wall drawing, shown at the Paula
Cooper Gallery, in 1968,58 he relegated that task to others in subse-
quent exhibitions.59 He did not use traditional labels such as "sculp-
ture" or "painting" to describe his works; they, like the works of
other conceptual artists, often were in a separate class not intended
to be permanent or immutable compositions. Some were made on
multiple occasions; others were never installed before his death in
2007; some in collections were installed many years ago and are
still extant; and still others were installed on multiple occasions in
different locations on different sized walls and therefore with vary-
ing proportions. Something quite different from traditional notions
of fine art is undoubtedly on the table here. LeWitt6° made that
clear in a famous essay, Paragraphs on Conceptual Art:
In conceptual art the idea of concept is the most
important aspect of the work. When an artist uses a
conceptual form of art, it means that all of the plan-
ning and decisions are made beforehand and the
execution is a perfunctory affair. The idea becomes
a machine that makes the art. This kind of art is not
theoretical or illustrative of theories; it is intuitive,
it is involved with all types of mental process and it
is purposeless. It is usually free from the depend-
ence on the skill of the artist as a craftsman. It is the
objective of the artist who is concerned with con-
ceptual art to make his work mentally interesting to
the spectator, and therefore usually he would want
58 See Hypnotic Nature Of Sol LeWitt Wall Drawings, IDEELART BLOG (May
24, 2016), https://www.ideelart.com/magazine/sol-lewitt-wall-drawings. When
asked by Paula Cooper, owner of the fledgling gallery where the first wall drawing
was installed in 1968, what to do with the installation when the exhibition was
over, LeWitt reportedly told her, "Just paint it out."
59 See HOGAN & SNOW supra note 16, at 39. This process began with Wall
Drawing #3 in 1969.
60 Sol LeWitt Wall Drawings, ARTIFEX PRESS,
https://artifexpress.com/catalogues/sol-lewitt-wall-drawings/description (last visit-
ed Feb. 17, 2019). The most important catalog of LeWitt drawings. Images from
that catalog are available at Barbara Krakow Gallery. See also Sol Le Witt Prints
Catalogue Raisonne 1947 2006, SOL LEWITT PRINTS,
https://www.sollewittprints.org/introduction (last visited Feb. 17, 2019).
20191
"TEMPORARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
it to become emotionally dry. There is no reason to
suppose, however, that the conceptual artist is out
to bore the viewer. It is only the expectation of an
emotional kick, to which one conditioned to ex-
pressionist art is accustomed, that would deter the
viewer from perceiving this art.61
Each artisan struggling to execute one of his works was, in
LeWitt's words, a "machine that makes the art.",6 2 Since the execu-
tion of a project was "a perfunctory affair" in the language of
LeWitt, there was no particular reason why he should personally
bring it to life. As noted, he rarely did. But despite the "machine"
and "perfunctory affair" language in his essay, it was and is often
difficult to implement LeWitt's instructions. While some of his di-
agrams are quite precise, 63 others leave an enormous amount of
discretion in the hands of the "installers" who draw or construct the
works.64 And even the most precise creations require the artisans
installing them to make an array of aesthetic and technical judg-
ments as they work. One of the largest installations of his wall
drawings now on display is at MASS MoCA in North Adams Mas-
sachusetts. The museum has posted online images of the works,
along with descriptions of the instructions, though neither the actu-
al certificates and diagrams, nor any working drawings made to aid
in the installations are online. 65 For example, installing the diagram
61 SOL LEWITT, PARAGRAPHS ON CONCEPTUAL ART 166 (Alicia Legg ed.,
1978).
62 LE CORBUSIER, TOWARD S A NEW ARCHITECTURE 107 (1986). This notion
mirrors a similar aesthetic statement made by Le Corbusier: "The house is a ma-
chine for living in." The notion has often been applied to his famous house, Villa
Savoye, completed in 1929.
63 See, e.g., Wall Drawing #337 and Wall Drawing #338 1977, THE ART
GALLERY NSW https://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/resources/exhibition-kits/sol-
lewitt/focus-works/ (last visited Feb. 17, 2019); see also Wall Drawing #564, ART
OBSERVED http://artobserved.com/2013/09/new-york-sol-lewitt-at-the-paula-
cooper-gallery-through-october- 12-2013/ (last visited Feb 17, 2019); Wall Draw-
ing #366, COMPUTATION FOR CREATIVE PRACTICES
http://cmuems.com/2015b/drawing-machines/ (last visited Feb. 17, 2019).
64 See, e.g., Wall Drawing #70, THE PRINTED MATTER,
https://www.printedmatter.org/catalog/tables/623/37864 (last visited Feb 17,
2019); see also Wall Drawing #91, YALE UNIVERSITY ART GALLERY
https://artgallery.yale.edu/collections/objects/179947 (last visited Feb 17, 2019).
65 See Wall Drawing 1180, MASS MOCA, https://massmoca.org/event/wall-
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
for Wall Drawing #1180 is described as requiring a person using a
marker, "within a four-meter (160") circle, [to] draw 10,000 black
straight lines and 10,000 black not straight lines. All lines are ran-
domly spaced and equally distributed. ' 66 Those executing the draw-
ing had to make "mundane" decisions about which markers to use,
where to place each of the 20,000 lines, and how hard to press on
the marker, as well as ineffable judgments about the meaning of
"randomly spaced" and "equally distributed." The best any concep-
tual artist like LeWitt could hope for was that those bringing the
work to life did do so "correctly," that the process was capable of
execution by human persistence and patience, and that the end re-
sult was of interest to viewers. Indeed, we learn from the MASS
MoCA posting that Wall Drawing # 1180 was executed incorrectly
in its first incarnation in Beirut.6 In short, creating a LeWitt work
is based on a hope that it is possible and a prayer that the artisans
are capable of bringing the underlying concept to fruition.68
The notion that LeWitt's instructions were always so precise
that his ingenuity was the only creative element at work is therefore
false. Indeed, LeWitt himself said as much in a 1971 essay entitled
Doing Wall Drawings that he penned three years after writing Par-
agraphs on Conceptual Art. In this essay he was candid about the
potentially extensive roles the artisans installing his works may
play. Among other things he said:
There are decisions which the draftsman makes,
within the plan, as part of the plan. Each individu-
drawing-i 180/ (last visited Feb. 4, 2019). Though not referenced to a LeWitt cer-
tificate, the website quotation reads very much like the language of a number of
other certificates I have read.
66 Id.
67 See id. The certificate and diagram for Wall Drawing #1180 was most re-
cently installed at the gallery Yale University Art Gallery. See also LeWitt Wall
Drawings: Expanding a Legacy, THE YALE UNIVERSITY ART GALLERY,
https://artgallery.yale.edu/exhibitions/exhibition/sol-lewitt-wall-drawings-
expanding-legacy; see also Yale Art Gallery (d@yaleartgallery), INSTAGRAM,
https://www.instagram.com/p/Bcw6hOaHTH1/. It is fascinating that the page with
the video invites guests to come to the museum to participate in the process.
68 See Hogan & Snow, supra note 61, at 72-73, 94, 126-129. Instructions for
other LeWitt wall drawings are available in Legg.
Diagrams for many of the works also are available online simply by per-
forming an image search for "LeWitt diagram."
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
al being unique, given the same instructions would
carry them out differently. He would understand
them differently. The artist must allow vanious in-
terpretations of his plan. The draftsman perceives
the artist's plan, then reorders it to his own experi-
ence and understanding. The draftsman's contribu-
tions are unforeseen by the artist, even if he, the
artist, is the draftsman. Even if the same draftsman
followed the same plan twice, there would be two
different works of art. No one can do the same
thing twice. The artist and the draftsman become
collaborators in making the art. 69
Flesh was put on Doing Wall Drawings in an interview of John
Vogt and Loren Smith by Julie Caniglia at the Walker Art Gallery
in Minneapolis. 70 Vogt and Smith worked on LeWitt projects at the
Walker with Sachi Cho and Chip Allen, two frequent LeWitt arti-
sans. They commented on the care, time, intense concentration,
discretion, and complexity involved in completing an installation.
At one point, Smith comments about her role in doing the work:
So much of what LeWitt was after was not the fin-
ished piece, but the concept of the piece. So look-
ing at these pictures of us working, seeing his con-
cept for a wall drawing being carried out, is in
some ways closer to his intention. Chip has
worked on hundreds of these pieces, and he said
that the instructions are really the art-and the act
of carrying them out. Apparently LeWitt never ac-
tually saw all results of all of his instructions car-
ried out. And he knew people could do them in
their own homes, or on a wall anywhere -they
just wouldn't have the original instructions.
In his earlier work, LeWitt was more into man-on-
69 Sol LeWitt, Doing WallDrawings, 3 (ARTNow:NEw YORK 1971).
70 See Julie Caniglia, "Peace or Misery": The Making of a Sol LeWitt Wall
Drawing, WALKER ART CENTER (Mar. 15, 2011),
https://walkerart.org/magazine/peace-or-misery.
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
the-street instructions-things anybody could
do-but over time, the nature of work changed. He
began to make pieces that on some level would be
affected by the personality of the person making
them, so he wanted those people to have training
in how to carry out the instructions. The kind of
patience and dedication required to make this
work isn't something that everyone has. So in
some sense it's how he's made personality a factor
in his later work.
If the process of installing a LeWitt wall drawing is often laden
with significant discretion in the hands and minds of the artisans
executing a work, who then is the author of the completed work for
copyright purposes? Was it LeWitt in the past? Is it the LeWitt Es-
tate now? And what of the artisans? Could a combination of actors
hold these rights? Unraveling this is critically important. The term
of copyright protection, the ability to assign rights in a work, the
right to terminate assignments of copyright interests, and the right
to claim moral rights in a work,7' as well as other major features of
copyright law, all are related to the concept of "author" or an au-
thor's successors. Further discussion of these issues follows.
C. DECIDING AUTHORSHIP
Resolving authorship in a setting like a wall drawing depends
on two critically important aspects of copyright law-the nature of
a derivative work and the ways in which authorship of a work may
be divided among various actors. First, recall the statutory directive
that the creator of a derivative work obtains a copyright only in the
new material added to the preexisting, original creation upon which
the derivative work is based.72 When, for example, a playwright au-
thors a script based on a novel the scope of legal protection provid-
ed the play is limited to the new material added by the writer. Pro-
tection of the novel remains in the hands of the original author in
the absence of a transfer of the copyright. As a result, creation of a
derivative work is dependent on obtaining permission from the par-
71 See 17 U.S.C. § 106A, 113(d) (1990).
72 See 17 U.S.C. § 103(b) (1976).
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
ty holding copyright in the original work. Dramatization of a novel
requires use of the novel; permission to do that must be obtained
before writing the play. And similarly, making a copy of a work,
rather than doing something derivative, also requires permission. In
the case of a LeWitt, the present installation of a wall drawing-
likely a derivative work-requires the permission of his estate.
Second, who is the author when execution of a work is divided
among various actors? The word "author" is not defined in the
copyright statute. The courts have attempted to place some rules
around the word, but exactitude is not always in the offing. The
party creating a wall drawing certificate and diagram-LeWitt in
our setting-was the author and owner of the copyright in those
documents when they were produced, assuming that the expression
they contained was original. Permission of that soul was a prereq-
uisite for an installation project to go forward. What about the sta-
tus of the artisans? Were they the creators of any new original ex-
pression in the derivative contents of a wall drawing? Did they hold
an interest in the new material they added to the original underlying
work? In general, if a person exercises significant direction and
control over an installation, that individual would be treated as the
author of the new material added during the installation.73
It is unlikely, however, that LeWitt or his estate fulfilled that
direction and control requirement in many of the settings in which
his works have been installed. The installers usually controlled the
way they carried out their work. As noted, LeWitt only installed his
first wall drawing.74 While LeWitt was alive, he would be consult-
ed about the installation of one of his creations. He was, after all,
the copyright owner; his permission was required. His role may
sometimes have gone beyond consultation. Before a work was in-
stalled in a particular location, working drawings that contained
measurements of the space to be occupied by the drawing, color in-
dications, or other basic features of the work that installers would
need to do a competent job, often were made. That was the case
with respect to Wall Drawing #679 installed in Stem's home,
71 See Erikson v. Trinity Theatre, Inc., 13 F.3d 1061 (71 Cir. 1994); Lindsay
v. The Wrecked and Abandoned Vessel R.M.S. Titanic, 52 U.S.P.Q.2d 1609
(S.D.N.Y. 1999); Aalmuhammed v. Lee, 202 F.3d 1227 (9 ffi Cir. 1999).
74 See HYPNOTIC NATURE OF SOL LEWITT WALL DRAWINGS, supra note 58.
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
though it is not clear who made the drawings.75 Two working draw-
ings were made before the installation, apparently with different
color arrangements.7 6 They are now held by the Menil Collection as
successors to the estate of William Stem. The more precisely de-
fined the project, the more likely it was that the finished project
would approximate the diagram and working drawings in appear-
ance. The size of the actual wall drawing would be significantly
larger than any of the previously created documents. Some other
details also might change. If the enlargement simply required a rote
use of measuring devices on a wall, the artisans may not have cre-
ated enough new material worthy of separate copyright protection
as original content of a derivative product. 77 LeWitt would be
deemed the primary controlling actor in the drama and therefore the
sole author. But this conclusion is hardly preordained and is usually
inaccurate. Originality is a vague concept in copyright law. And
creative talent can be an integral part of the calculus. If the en-
largement involved not just rote use of measuring devices, but also
a special degree of care in their use and the ability to carefully im-
plement and attractively fabricate the work, then a derivative work
and its new copyright likely resulted. 7 For works that were not
precise, such as Wall Drawing # 1180 described above,7 9 it was im-
possible for LeWitt to tell those installing the actual wall drawing
how to proceed, except in the most general terms. In that case, it
would be virtually certain that the artisans held an interest in the
new material added when they created the derivative work-the in-
stalled version of Wall Drawing # 1180.
After LeWitt's death in 2007, can his estate ever claim to be
75 See Telephone Interview with Aaron Parazette, Associate Professor, Uni-
versity of Houston (Oct. 22, 2018) (indicating that they were made by persons un-
known at his studio).
76 See id.
77 See, e.g., Meshwerks, Inc. v. Toyota Motor Sales U.S.A., Inc., 528 F.3d
1258, 1267 (10th Cir. 2008) (explaining that the produced work must sufficiently
deviate from the original in order to qualify for copyright protection).
78 See Alva Studios, Inc. v. Winninger, 177 F. Supp. 265 (S.D.N.Y. 1959).
Alva v. Winninger is regarded as one of the most famous cases on this point. It
involved the hand crafting of a copy of Rodin's famous Hand of God sculpture.
The court concluded that the creative energy underlying the careful the making of
the copy justified awarding it protection, even though the goal was to make it look
as much like the original as possible.
79 See infra p. 19.
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
the sole author of an installation? The installation must be done
with the estate's permission, but LeWitt is no longer around to cre-
ate or give instructions for making working drawings for installa-
tion at a particular site. The best that can be done is to seek out pre-
viously executed working drawings in those cases where the works
were installed at earlier times. Those drawings typically survived
their use in assisting an installation. Many are held by the LeWitt
Estate; others are housed in institutions all over the world where
drawings were installed.s It is possible that installers executing a
LeWitt project today are merely rote copiers of extant certificates,
diagrams, and working drawings, but that is even less likely now
than before LeWitt's death in 2007 when he was available to over-
see the crafting of new working drawings for each site. Once arti-
sans and installers become involved in making new working draw-
ings for a new site, the ownership outcome may change as well.
The only other way in which installers or project supervisors
might be thought of as extensions of LeWitt or his estate was if the
artisans were employees.s While "a work prepared by an employee
within the scope of his or her employment" is deemed to be au-
thored by the employer, 2 those installing LeWitt's works during
his life were not his employees, but independent contractors paid
for each project. 8 3 That still is the case. They may be well trained
80 See Telephone Interview with John Lavertu, LeWitt Collection Assistant
Registrar, (Sep. 4, 2018).
81 See 17 U.S.C. § 101 (2018). The second part of the definition of awork
made for hire dealing with commissioned works doesn't apply here; its coverage is
limited to distinct classes of works. It is also theoretically possible that LeWitt and
the artisans each held ownership as a joint author. The statute allows such joint
ownership when two or more people prepare a work "with the intention that their
contributions be merged into inseparable or interdependent parts of a unitary
whole." See id. Only if LeWitt himself worked closely with the artisans, either in
preparing them for the work or onsite, would this apply. But if it did, then all the
participants would have authorial rights. It is more likely in this artistic setting that
LeWitt directed that certain steps be taken during the installation and the artisans
carried them out. In that case, LeWitt might have been the only author.
82 17 U.S.C. § 101 (2018). (Statute includes definition of work for hire); see
generally Community for Creative Non-Violence v. Reed, 490 U.S. 730 (1989).
83 Email from Steven Henry, Agent for the Paul Cooper Gallery, to Richard
Chused (Aug. 31, 2018) (on file with author). There are Estate trained drafters
who are responsible for executing the work; they are typically assisted by locally
sourced artists or art students. None of the drafters are employees of the Estate;
they are independent contractors who are paid by the day. All the costs of installa-
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
by people associated in some way with the estate, but that does not
automatically change the ownership situation. And once on site
they use their own judgment and intuition when installing a draw-
ing. It is, therefore, quite possible that artisans, perhaps as joint au-
thors among themselves, 8 4 hold a copyright interest in wall draw-
ings installed before and after LeWitt's death. Unless they acted in
a rote "copy-cat" role, the material they added to LeWitt's extant
directions was created with permission of the copyright owner and
was original in ways not completely anticipated by the original
concept. That is, they owned rights in a derivative work.
D. OWNERSHIP PATTERNS IN WALL DRAWING #679 AFTER THE
DEATH OF STERN
After riding this copyright merry-go-round, the status of the
wall drawing in the Stem house when it was sold to Georgia Hitch-
cock may best be described as ambiguous. When it was first in-
stalled, all required permissions were in place. The copyrights in
the certificate and diagram were held by LeWitt. Stem owned the
physically tangible certificate and diagram, as well as the physical
location of the drawing-his house-and the physical aspect of the
marks on the wall of the house after they were in place. Once the
wall drawing was installed, its copyright was held by LeWitt, or at
least that is what those involved in the kerfuffle over the drawing
have assumed. 85 But as noted, the installed composition may be a
derivative work of the diagram, certificate, and working drawings,
and the copyright in the new material in the drawing might have
been held by the installers-Patricia Phillips and Rebecca Schwab.
In many cases, those making the first installation are listed on the
certificate. That was true for Wall Drawing #679, but not for Wall
Drawing #49.86 While it is clear that that a working drawing used to
tion-labor, materials, any equipment like scaffolding or ladders-are the respon-
sibility of the purchaser or owner of the wall drawing.
84 See supra note 81 and accompanying text.
85 Wall Drawing 274, https://massmoca.org/event/walldrawing274/, (last vis-
ited Feb. 17, 2019).
86 See E-mail from David Aylsworth to Richard Chused (Aug. 28, 2018) (on
file with author) (The installers' names for #679 from David Alysworth at The
Menil Collection. The certificate for #49, displayed above at p. 8, only lists the
place of the first installation-the Jewish Museum in New York.).
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
craft the installation was in the house while the work progressed
and that it was a much smaller version of the work with the same
color scheme used in the final version, the scope of differences be-
tween that document and the completed work is unclear.8 7 None-
theless, it is reasonably clear that substantial amounts of creativity
were required of the artisans who did the work-so much that it
almost surely was a derivative work. The installed work certainly
was a much-enlarged version of the working drawing. And in a tell-
ing interview of William Stem in 2012, Tyler Rudick described in
some detail the architect's recollections about the scope of creativi-
ty required of the artisans who did the work:
From a distance, the wall drawing is a simple ar-
rangement of colored lines and rectangles. Up
close, however, one can see additional thick layers
of washes and the sharp edges where one hue
meets another.
When the artists painted the piece, they only used
four colors of ink - blue, yellow, red, black -
and diluted each in buckets of water," the architect
remembered, adding that noted Texas artists Jeff
Elrod and Aaron Parazette were both on the work
crew employed by LeWitt, who never physically
touched his final pieces.
87 Telephone Interview with David Aylsworth, Collections Registrar, The
Menil Collection (Aug. 1, 2018). Not sure about exact differences between the
certificate and diagram, the working drawings, and the installed work since the
Menil Collection has not given me permission to see the documents for Wall
Drawing #679. I have requested access more than once, suggesting that all I want-
ed was to see the documents online not to take pictures or preserve images of
them. The first inquiry about viewing the documents was in a conversation with
the Menil Collection Registrar. Our conversation on this and other issues was
quite pleasant. I asked Mr. Aylsworth if I could see the documents. Request was
declined. See also Email from David Aylsworth (Sep. 14, 2018) (on file with au-
thor). The most recent communication was by email when I reemphasized that I
had no desire to retain any images of any items. I was told politely but firmly that
the documents were deemed "highly confidential" and were not available for my
perusal. See also Telephone Interview with Aaron Parazette (Oct. 22, 2018).
LeWitt was not present during the time the wall drawing was made.
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
These rich tones are made by layering on the ink
with cotton cloth. The bluish color, for example, is
21 layers of the blue and black inks. The process
almost gives the look of a fresco, but it's not. It's
painted right onto the surface of the wall." 8
After LeWitt's death, his copyright interests in the certificate, dia-
gram, and wall marks became the property of his estate. But the in-
stallers' interests, if any, were independent of the estate and contin-
ued to exist after LeWitt's death. After Stem died, the property
interests in his art collection, as well as in his house, were be-
queathed to the Menil Collection. The museum, therefore, held the
traditional property interests in the certificate and diagram and the
marks on the house's living room wall. As noted, those who in-
stalled the wall drawing in 1991, however, may still have owned an
interest in the derivative aspects of the installed piece.
The drawing was covered over with a skim-coat shortly before
the house was sold to Dr. Georgia Hitchcock. There is nothing in
American copyright law that prevents artists or their successors
from destroying or agreeing to destroy their own work if the owner
of the physical copy of the work is amenable. 9 Nor is there any
constraint on making a work designed to last for a limited period of
time.90 The Menil Collection insists that destruction of the work
88 See RUDICK, supra note 27; Telephone Interview with Tyler Rudick (Oct.
22, 2018). Parazette confirmed that the ink surface was installed in multiple layers
with pads after the wall was carefully taped in various segments.
89 See Gregory Alexander, Of Buildings, Statutes, Art, and Sperm: The Right
to Destroy and the Duty to Preserve, 27 CORNELL J. L. & PUB. POL'Y 619, 620,
636-647 (2018). The idea of destroying a work is not much written about. There
are however, significant constraints on the right of those other than the artist to
destroy a work installed in or on a building during the life of the artist, as the re-
cent controversy over the demolition of the 5Pointz aerosol art complex demon-
strated. See generally Richard Chused, Moral Right: The Anti-Rebellion Graffiti
Heritage of 5Pointz, 41 COLUM. J. L. & ARTS 583 (2018). I suspect the dearth of
commentary on the subject will quickly change now that Banksy pulled off one of
the greatest pranks in the history of art in October 2018 -the partial shredding of
Girl With Balloon immediately after it was gaveled sold by Sotheby's in London
for over one million pounds. See Scott Reyburn, Banksy Painting Self-Destructs
After Fetching $1.4 Million atSotheby's, THE NEW YORK TIMES (Oct. 6, 2018),
https ://www. nytimes.com/2018/10/06/arts/design/uk-banksy-painting-
sothebys.html. 90 See, e.g., Katie McGrath, 8 Works That Self-Destruct, ARTSY (Jun. 14,
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
was always the intent of the parties when Stem agreed to give a be-
quest of his entire collection to the museum.9' That is all fine and
dandy if everyone with copyright and property interests in the wall
drawing agreed, as the Menil contends. But what about those arti-
sans who installed the drawing? If they held an interest in the piece
when it was covered over in 2014 and did not consent, was a reme-
dy available? And, in addition, who controls decisions about restor-
ing the work-the LeWitt estate, The Menil Collection, Georgia
Hitchcock, the installers, or some combination? Other difficult
questions arise about the status of the wall drawing when and after
it was covered over in 2014. Did anyone hold interests that were
violated? Did the obliteration of the piece mean that its status as a
"LeWitt" ended? Perhaps it did, at least if the Menil story that all
relevant parties intended to end the visible life of Wall Drawing
#679 when Stem died is accurate. The wall drawing's continued
physical existence was no longer with the permission of the owner
of the certificate and diagram-by then the Menil Collection-or
the copyright owner in both the certificate and diagram and the
marks on the wall-by then the artist's estate. But does that mean
that the Hitchcocks may not uncover the marks if they wish? What
about the artisans who worked on the drawing and, most notably,
their moral right authority over mutilation or destruction of their
work? This may get us thinking about how many angels dance on
the head of a pin. But trying to do the choreography is worth the
effort; much is to be learned. These various issues of control over
the status of Wall Drawing #679 are taken up in the next section of
the essay.
2017), https://www.artsy.net/article/artsy-editorial-8-artworks-self-destruct. In ad-
dition to graffiti, there are many other conceptual and other art works which are
designed to be temporary.
91 See Email from Tommy Napier, Assistant Director of Communications of
the Menil Collection, to Michael Roffer, Associate Librarian and Professor of Le-
gal Research, New York Law School (April 9, 2018) (on file with author). In the
attached email from David Aylsworth to Jonna Hitchcock (Apr. 9, 2018), Jonna
Hitchcock wonders about whether the tale is totally accurate. See HALPERIN, supra
note 10 (suggesting, for example, that the re-inking of the drawing after ten years
implies it may have been intended to be permanent). But his wall drawings often
were re-inked after they were up for a time. See also CHRISTIE'S, supra note 50.
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
IV. INTERESTS IN THE DESTRUCTION, MUTILATION, AND
RESTORATION OF TEMPORARY WORK
A series of questions arises from statements by the copyright
owners in the certificate and diagram claiming that the marks mak-
ing up Wall Drawing #679 on the wall at the Stern/Hitchcock home
no longer represent a "LeWitt" work. Does that mean that the
marks no longer have a right to be visible to human eyes? Does that
mean that any attempt to resurrect them is illegitimate? This is an-
other way of probing the copyright law impact of an artist or copy-
right owner withdrawing or attempting to withdraw authentication
of a work-to deny authorship. Is it even possible for artists to
"deauthenticate" work previously recognized as theirs? Taking a
slightly different tack, would restoring Wall Drawing #679-
deemed by the Menil and the LeWitt Estate to be an unauthentic
work-expose an unauthorized copy or derivative work of the orig-
inal? Such a result would suggest the following: that the Menil Col-
lection -together with the copyright holder -the LeWitt Estate,
and perhaps the artisans, have the joint authority to control authen-
tication and also the right to control making such marks visible on a
wall. 92 At the other extreme, if recovering the marks left on the
wall behind the skim-coat is not uncovering a "LeWitt" at all and
perhaps therefore not revealing a copy or derivative work of the di-
agram but only some curious marks on a wall lacking authenticity,
then the owners of the physical marks on the wall may do as they
please with them as long as they don't try to pass them off as a
LeWitt. The Menil Collection has taken the interesting position that
this option is fine with them.93 Did they have to do that? And what
if, in addition to uncovering the markings, presumably somewhat
damaged by the Menil's installation of the skim-coat and its later
removal by the Hitchcocks, the Hitchcocks attempt as best they can
to return the wall to its appearance when owned by Stem? Does it
make any difference that the Hitchcocks would have to use artisans
not approved by the LeWitt Estate? Would that be equivalent to the
creation of an unlawful derivative work? Again, the Menil Collec-
92 See 17 U.S.C. § 106(5) (2018). Note that in this setting the copyright issue
is about the right to make a copy or a derivative work, not the right to display. On-
ly the right to control display a work publicly is held by the copyright owner.
93 See KAPLAN, supra note 12.
20191
"TEMPORARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
tion seems not to care; the marks on the wall, to them, are not a
"LeWitt" and therefore virtually worthless. Should they care?
A. CONCEPTUAL ART, OWNERSHIP INTERESTS, TEMPORALITY,
AND RESTORATION
To add a layer of irony to the inquiry, Julia Halpern notes that
Jonna Hitchcock views the effort to restore the markings in the
house "as a kind of conceptual art project of her own."94 The name
of the website memorializing the restoration project-Unerasing
Sol Le Wit is a "nod" to Rauschenberg's famous work, Erased De
Kooning Drawing. 95 That nod refers to a renowned event in the his-
tory of contemporary art involving William De Kooning and Rob-
ert Rauschenberg. In 1953 the young Robert Rauschenberg asked
the well-known and successful artist William De Kooning if he
could have one of De Kooning's drawings for the purpose of eras-
ing as much of it as he could. After some discussion, De Kooning
agreed to his request.96 At one point, when asked about his erasure
project, Rauschenberg said that some thought of his act as "vandal-
ism." He preferred to see it as "poetry., 97 His evaluation is merito-
nous. De Kooning's decision to select an unsold work of value
stored in his studio and allow Rauschenberg to obliterate it was it-
self a creative act. Perhaps their interaction expressed a mutual un-
derstanding that creativity comes from some deep, unfathomable
place, that sometimes the allure of art lies in the inability to discern
its origins or meanings, that destruction can be part of a process of
94 See HALPERIN, supra note 10.
95 Un-Erasing Sol LeTJitt, http://unerasingsollewitt.com/contact-2.html (last
visited Feb. 2, 2019). This line appears on the site memorializing the LeWitt resto-
ration project: "With a nod to Rauschenberg, we embark on this project which we
have titled 'Un-Erasing Sol LeWitt. '
96 See San Fransisco Museum of Modem Art, Robert Rauschenberg on
'Erased de Kooning," YouTUBE (Apr. 27, 2010),
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nGRNQER16Do (where one version of the
story is told by Rauschenberg); see also Sarah Roberts, Erased de Kooning Draw-
ing, SAN FRANCISCO MUSEUM OF MODERN ART (July, 2013),
https://www.sfmoma.org/artwork/98.298/essay/erased-de-kooning-drawing/. 97 Robert Rauschenberg - Erased De Kooning, YouTUBE (May 15, 2007),
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v-tpCWh3IFtDQ.
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
building or rebuilding, that art movements constantly reinvent
themselves, and that art-like life-dies and is reborn cyclically.9 "
The "original" of Rauschenberg's erased De Kooning is housed
in the permanent collection of the San Francisco Museum of Mod-
em Art.99 An image of the work De Kooning handed over to
Rauschenberg is not extant, though an infrared version of the
erased work with some markings is available.'00 But suppose an
image of the original is found and the San Francisco MoMA elects
to restore the original De Kooning piece-an unthinkable step in
light of the notoriety of the Rauschenberg/De Kooning interplay.
But putting aside the hoopla that would cause, should or can it be
done? The question actually is deeply complex. It involves not only
the propriety of altering Rauschenberg's erased work of De Koo-
ning, but also of reconstructing the now almost completely oblite-
rated original De Kooning composition. Since De Kooning and
Rauschenberg created a "new" work by jointly agreeing to oblite-
rate the original drawing, can it legitimately be "recreated" by third
parties to their arrangement? Or, since De Kooning agreed to let
Rauschenberg destroy the work, can others later restore it and
claim it is a work by "De Kooning?" And that, of course, is also the
Wall Drawing #679 dilemma.
The Menil Collection's views about its right, or perhaps duty,
to cover up Wall Drawing #679 when they sold the house reflect a
set of attitudes much like those of Rauschenberg and De Kooning.
LeWitt's wall drawings, like graffiti, were not always intended by
the artist to be permanent. Even now they often come and go as
their wall display spaces are used for the works of other artists or
reconfigured when museums alter their interiors. But it is one thing
for graffiti artists or others to install temporary work or for creative
souls to permit people to erase their creations; it is another for
98 For a quite similar description of the De Kooning/Rauschenberg events, see
Richard Chused, Moral Right: The Anti-Rebellion Graffiti Heritage of 5Pointz, 41
COLUM. J. L. & ARTS 583, 604-05 (2018).
99 Robert Rauschberg, Erased de Kooning Drawing, SAN FRANCiSCO
MUSEUM OF MODERN ART, https://www.sfmoma.org/artwork/98.298 (last visited
Feb. 2, 2019).
100 See Ben Blackwell & Robin D. Myers, Digitally Enhanced Infrared Scan
ofRobert Rauschenberg's Erased de Kooning Drawing, SAN FRANciSco MUSEUM
OF MODERN ART, https://www.sfmoma.org/artwork/98.298/research-
materials/document/EDeK_98.298_003/ (last visited Feb. 2, 2019).
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
someone else to restore such art after its intentionally orchestrated
"demise." And when a creative work of art-any work, but espe-
cially a temporal one-is restored, what is its new "provenance?"
This has recently become a much more prominent phenomenon.
LeWitt's Wall Drawing #679 controversy is only one example of
the issue. A growing number of Banksy'0' works, for example,
have been brought back to life, sometimes at great cost and rarely
with the explicit blessings of the artist. 10 2 Large, extremely popular
exhibitions of his work have drawn sell-out crowds.'0 3 Works in
London, 0 4 New York,' 0 5 Toronto, 0 6 and New Orleans, 1 0 7 and other
places, have been restored, reworked, or moved to new locations.
Should this be condemned or praised when done by someone out-
101 See WILL ELLSWORTH-JONES, BANKSY: THE MAN BEHIND THE WALL
(2012). Banksy, who is compulsively reclusive, has made street art in often unlike-
ly places all over the world. To see an online collection of his street art, see 80
Beautiful Street Crimes Done by Banksy, BORED PANDA,
http://www.boredpanda.com/80-beautiful-street-crimes-done-by-banksy/ (last vis-
ited Feb. 2, 2019). Pest Control is primarily responsible for the authentication of
Banksy's work, see The Practical Guide To Pest Control, My ART BROKER,
https://www.myartbroker.com/artist/banksy/the-practical-guide-to-pest-
control/.com (last visited Feb. 2, 2019).
102 See Ailis Brennan, Banksy Speaks Out Against Moscow Exhibition That
He's "Got Nothing to do With, " Go LONDON (Aug. 16, 2018),
https://www. standard. co.uk/go/london/arts/banksy-speaks-out-against-moscow-
exhibition-that-hes-got-nothing-to-do-with-a3 912841. html.
103 See There's a Giant Banksy Show in Toronto, But How Good is it if
Banksy Himself Isn 't in on the Joke, CAN. BROAD. CORP. (June 15, 2018),
ca.news.yahoo.com/apos-giant-banksy-show-toronto- 174546663.html; see gener-
ally The Art of Banksy, https://www.banksyexhibit.com/ (last visited Feb. 17,
2018).
104 See Amie Tsang, Hidden Banksy Art to Be Displayed by London Develop-
er, THE NEW YORK TIMES (Aug. 23, 2017),
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/08/23/business/banksy-art-london-lost.html.
105 See Banksy's East Village Mural Restored After Vandal Tags the Art,
SPECTRUM NEWS NY 1 AND ASSOCIATED PRESS (Mar. 18, 2018),
http://www.nyl .com/nyc/all-boroughs/news/2018/03/18/banksy-east-village-nyc-
zehra-dogan-mural-red-graffiti-painted-over.
106 See Jill Mahoney, The Path to Banksy, TE GLOBE AND MAIL (Nov. 12,
2017), https://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/toronto/toronto-developer-who-
salvaged-banksy-graffiti-installs-it-in-pedestrianpathway/article33989061/.
107 See Sara Lieberman, A Newly Restored Banksy Has Been Unveiled in New
Orleans, CONDE NAST TRAVELER (Dec. 1, 2017),
http://www.cntraveler.com/story/a-newly-restored-banksy-has-been-unveiled-in-
new-orleans.
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
side the artist's ambit of authority or permission, including years
after the work originally was made? Can these removed and "re-
stored" works be passed as Banksy's work?
One of the Banksy "restoration" projects raised issues closely
related to Wall Drawing #679. The Toronto restoration involved
the removal of a badly damaged piece of wall art, Muzzled Dog, to
a restoration studio. To make the move, the piece was sawed out of
a cement wall in three pieces. It was then enclosed in a large stain-
less-steel frame and placed in a protective case. The assemblage
was then placed in the PATH as part of a new large office building
redevelopment project at One York Street in Toronto. The PATH is
an extensive complex of underground and above ground passage-
ways with shops and other establishments running for many kilo-
meters between dozens of buildings in Toronto's center.'l 8 The re-
installation of the Banksy was one of a series of public
improvements made by the developers of One York Street to obtain
substantial zoning bonuses.'0 9 Murray White, an author of a news-
paper article, posed the right question about the project in his head-
line, which was, "What would Banksy think of Toronto's new
Banksy?"" The word "new" was an apt description. The pictures
below exhibit side-by-side views of the original and reinstalled
Banksy wall images in Toronto, which went from trash cans to
highly polished stone."'
108 See PATH Map, http://torontopath.com/path-map/ (last visited Feb. 17,
2019); see also Paul Attfield, A Look at One York Street Harbour Plaza Residenc-
es, THE GLOBE AND MAIL (May 11, 2018),
https://www.theglobeandmail.com/report-on-business/industry-news/property-
report/a-look-at-one-york-street-and-harbour-plaza-residence s/article 16205704/.
9Muay Whyte, 11at Would Bank Think 0fToronto s New' Bankiy l
STAR (Feb. 21, 201'7).
https: /wwthe Starcom/enterailnment/visualartSi20 1702/2 1what-Would-bankSy-
think-of-torontos-new-banksy.html. 110 See id
... See Richard Lautens, TORONTO STAR,
https://images.thestar.com/content/dam/thestar/entertainment/visualarts/2017/02/2
1/what-would-banksy-think-of-torontos-new-banksy/banksy-20103 .jpg. size-
custom-crop.0x650.jpg (last visited Fed. 17, 2019); see also Paul Casselman,
MENKES DEVELOPMENT (Mar. 7, 2017),
https://www.canadianinteriors.com/features/restoring-banksy/.
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
Banksy in Original Loca- "Banksy" encased along the PATH in
tion downtown Toronto
Though Banksy and his authentication website Pest Control have
been silent about the Toronto project, it would be interesting to
know his views on the restoration and reconstruction of his original
work. While his opinions about restoration projects are not well
known, he has at times objected to unauthorized exhibitions and
auction sales of his work unless the creation was originally express-
ly made for purposes of sale." 2 At times he has refused to authenti-
cate or tried to withdraw authentication of drawings put up for sale
112 He does sell work; that work is now frequently resold at auctions or galler-
ies. But there are a number of articles about Banksy's antipathy to using his wall
art pieces for money making adventures. He views his outdoor creations as gifts to
the public. See Henri Neuendorf, Unsanctioned Banksy Show Wi Anger Artist,
His Former Dealer Says, ARTNET NEWS (Sep. 13, 2016),
https://news.artnet.com/art-world/steve-lazarides-banksy-retrospective-646760;
Banksy Calls the "Stealing Banksy? " Auction "Disgusting, " ARTNET NEWS (April
25, 2014), https://news.artnet.com/art-world/banksy-calls-the-stealing-banksy-
auction-disgusting- 12092; Henri Neuendorf, Unauthorized Banksy Show Planned
in Rome, The Artist Did Not Give Permission, ARTNET NEWS (May 17, 2016),
https://news.artnet.com/market/banksy-unauthorized-exhibition-rome-498992;
Scott Reyburn, Off the Street, Onto the Auction Block, TE NEW YORK TIMEs
(May 2, 2014), https://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/05/arts/intemational/taking-art-
off-the-street-and-onto-the-auction-block.html.
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
by private parties." 3 Presumably transformations of his work for
non-cash incentives and monetary gain, as in Toronto's grant of
zoning bonuses, might raise his hackles.
But like much about Banksy, his actual views are a mystery.
The recent and now (in)famous half-shredding of a 2006 version of
Girl With Balloon immediately after its auction at Sotheby's was
gaveled down as sold certainly left many both amazed and befud-
dled." 4 Banksy had installed a shredder inside the ornate frame he
used for the work that was apparently activated by a remote control
in the auction room when the sale was complete." 5 Those in the
room were initially stunned; then many broke into smiles. For my
purposes, it created a mystery. On the one hand it can be read as
another statement from Banksy that the commercial art world is
scandalous; on the other hand, his prank created a truly unique
work likely to be worth much more half-shredded in that scandal-
ous world than the large sum it went for at the auction.
While much of Banksy's stated or pretended angst may be read
as motivated by reactions outside the ambit of traditional intellec-
tual property law or even artistic movements, it gives rise to fasci-
nating questions about restoration similar to the LeWitt problem.
Artist's works are often transferred or sold to new owners, re-
framed, moved to dramatically different physical surroundings,
carefully restored, or analyzed and imaged in untraditional ways by
conservators, curators, and art historians. While the legal structure
of gifts and trusts may be able to constrain such behavior, those
limits are not embedded in widely applicable intellectual property
norms. There is no precedent about whether the winner of the now
partially shredded Banksy Girl With Balloon could legally restore
the work to its previous form. Complicating that question are the
facts that the successful bidder accepted the half-shredded work af-
ter rejecting an offer from Sotheby's to void the auction sale and
that Banksy's authentication "agency"-Pest Control-recertified
. See, e.g., Melena Ryzik, Another Banksy Mural to Go From Wall to Auc-
tion, THE NEW YORK TIMES (Aug. 13, 2013),
https://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/14/arts/design/another-banksy-mural-to-go-
from-wall-to-auctionhtml.
114 See REYBURN, supra note 89 (reporting the full story).
115 See Shredding Banksy's the Girl and Balloon-The Director's half cut,
YouTUBE (Oct. 17, 2018), https://www.youtube.com/watch?=vxkwRNIZgdY
(explaining Banksy's prank).
20191
"TEMPORARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
the piece as a "new" Banksy work and changed its name to Love Is
in the Bin.' 6 Does "new" mean the "old" one can't be recovered?
Oh, Banksy, you truly are a provocateur. So much for angst.
Significant recreations, alterations, mistaken attributions, muti-
lations, and other changes made by non-authors, however, may be
limited by copyright or moral right law. And that is where Wall
Drawing #679 reenters the scene. As noted, I have not seen any of
the Wall Drawing #679 documents. But from information I do
have, the actual installation of the wall drawing was a fairly com-
plex undertaking; it was almost certainly a "derivative work" for
copyright purposes." 7 In addition, the installation of even the most
straight forward wall drawings involve both an increase in size
(typically dramatic) and a significant amount of creativity and artis-
tic talent in their actualization. When the work was covered with a
skim-coat, did its status as a derivative work change? Perhaps. At a
minimum, it is problematic to say that the marks were still fixed in
a tangible medium of expression. While a machine or device able
to "see" though the skim-coat might have been able to reveal some
version of the marks, they certainly could not be mistaken for the
original ones. Is that enough to label the work as one that remains
"fixed"-that is a work that can be "perceived, reproduced, or oth-
erwise communicated for more than a period of transitory dura-
tion."".. Does that part of the definition requiring that a work be
perceivable with the aid of a "machine" or a "device" include the
possibility of using a tool to strip away a skim-coat or an x-ray ma-
chine to find it? Isn't it more likely that the work refers to technical
or electronic devices that reproduce the actual work rather than
hardware tools or devices that reveal only a distant relative of the
original? And wasn't the intention of the Menil Collection and the
LeWitt Estate to end the life of the wall drawing upon the sale of
the Stem house relevant to any decision about its continued exist-
ence? It is challenging to imagine a policy reason that justifies call-
ing the covered-up wall drawing a "fixed" version of the original
after it was placed under a skim-coat because of a desire by the ma-
116 See Scott Reyburn, Winning Bidder for Shredded Banksy Painting Says
She'll Keep It, THE NEWYORK TIMES (Oct. 11, 2018),
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/1 /arts/design/winning-bidder-for-shredded-
banksy -painting-say s-shell-keep-it. html.
11 7 See supra p. 14.
118 17 U.S.C. § 101 (2018).
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
jor players in the drama to obliterate it. But all that may be said
with certainty is that the status of the buried marks is unclear. And
if the marks of the original installation are uncovered, they likely
will be marred by the installation and removal of the skim-coat.
That makes their status even more difficult to define. Can a copy or
derivative work be resurrected from oblivion? Or do the marks take
on the status of a new work? If the marks are restored, has a new
derivative work been created? Does any of this matter?
It might, especially if we credit the contention that the Menil
Collection, the LeWitt Estate, and the Estate of William Stem, as
owners of the copyright in the wall drawing, the copyright in the
diagram, and of the physical marks on the wall, all agreed to de-
stroy Wall Drawing #679 when the house was sold. They then used
both their copyright and physical authority over the work to end its
life as a derivative work fixed in a tangible medium of expression.
And the Menil has made their view quite clear that any reappear-
ance of the wall drawing would no longer be a work of LeWitt." 9 If
the marks of the wall drawing are ever revealed they would not be
"authentic" in the eyes of the museum; their reappearance presum-
ably would not be an image made with the permission of the copy-
right holder or the owner of the certificate and diagram. Arguably,
therefore, if the skim-coat is removed the newly visible marks
would either be an infringing copy or, if different in some noticea-
ble way from the original marks, an infringing derivative work of
the original installed wall drawing. That would be especially true if
a restoration was done by persons not approved by the LeWitt Es-
tate. Perhaps, therefore, the Menil Collection should care about
what the Hitchcock's are doing rather than sluff it off
Certainty, however, is hardly a thoughtful way to envision an-
gels dancing on the head of a pin. Does the failure of the Menil to
completely obliterate the marks, rather than merely cover them
with an easily removable skim-coat or to get the permission of the
artisans who installed it, mean that the wall drawing was actually
not ended, that its life is ongoing? 120 In that case, uncovering the
wall drawing would not be the creation of a new copy or derivative
work but the revelation of a "living LeWitt." Or might it mean that
119 See AYLSWORTH, supra note 15.
120 That is a position Jonna Hitchcock has articulated. See HALPERIN, supra
note 10.
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
its burial without the permission of the installers was inappropriate
and therefore that its revelation is a merely a proper restoration of
the work? Though probably damaged by the skim-coat's installa-
tion and removal, the marks would still be the product of the origi-
nal derivative work copyright holders. Just like any other work that
deteriorates over time, a new work is not made when an old one
falls apart or sustains damage. In addition, though The Menil and
the LeWitt Estate may have had the authority to obliterate the work
and end its visible life when they owned the house, they no longer
own the physical marks-even deteriorated ones-on the wall. In
this setting their efforts to deny authenticity of the work may be
largely irrelevant. They can't steal their way into the Hitchcock
abode in the dead of night and erase it with solvent and paint. Nor,
in these circumstances, should any court find the newly revealed,
but merely marred rather than destroyed, marks to be an infringe-
ment. Mere revelation of a still viable drawing in a private house
might not be the same as creating a new copy.
The contrast between these two outcomes reflects a deep con-
flict between traditional rights over physical assets and rights in in-
tellectual property-the rights split apart by Section 202 of the
Copyright Act. The wall drawing marks on the wall of what is now
the Hitchcock residence, as a traditional matter of real property, are
owned and under the control of Georgia Hitchcock. Just like the
studs that support the wall, she has physical control over whatever
is inside the wall, whether it be under a skim-coat or deeper inside
as part of the structure of the building. Why should anyone be able
to bar her from taking a look at the wall drawing any more than she
may be barred from bashing a hole in the wall and checking out the
studs? The Menil Collection, however, claims that the term of the
wall drawing's visible life has ended. If the museum claims the
right to re-obliterate Wall Drawing #679, that must be based on the
concept that the wall drawing, like a temporary exhibit on the
streets of New York, may have a pre-determined lifetime. And
once that lifetime is over, Dr. Hitchcock no longer has the right to
maintain the visibility of the marks. That idea arises not because
Hitchcock consciously bought a LeWitt for a limited time, but be-
cause those selling her the house sold her absolutely no access
rights in the wall drawing. The notion may be similar in an odd
way to a life estate. When a life estate ends on the death of the pos-
sessor there is nothing left for the successors in interest of the life
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
estate owners to take directly from that person. So too with a wall
drawing whose life has terminated. Digging up a corpse, you might
claim in a morbid moment, does not reinvigorate a dead life estate.
And, the argument continues, nor can exposing a dead wall draw-
ing bring it back to life.
Related issues arise with various Banksy works that have been
restored, auctioned off, or moved to new locations, such as the pre-
viously mentioned Muzzled Dog in Toronto. One of the most high-
ly disputed auctions involved Slave Labor (Bunting Boy), a piece
critiquing slave labor, stenciled onto the wall of a thrift shop in
North London. It was surreptitiously removed, put up for auction in
Miami, withdrawn from sale after widespread protests in London,
and finally returned to London where it was auctioned off at anoth-
er location for over one-million dollars.12 i Though many stories
circulated suggesting that the work was stolen, it turned out that the
owner of the building arranged for its removal and sale. In both
the Toronto removal, restoration, and relocation of Muzzled Dog
and the removal and sale of Slave Labor (Bunting Boy), Banksy
owned the copyrights in the works, but not the physical marks on
the walls. Thinking in property-like terms, the owners of the build-
ing owned the physical qualities of the Banksy creation. If they
wanted to sell it, so be it. But Banksy has said that when he puts up
a work in a widely visible location, his intention is to make a gift to
the public, not to the owner of the building the creation rests up-
on.1 23 Is it appropriate to offer up for sale a work the artist has ded-
icated to the public or declared to be non-transferable?
121 See Disputed Banksy Graffiti Art Sold for $1.1 in London, CBC NEWS
(June 4, 2013), https://www.cbc.ca/news/entertainment/disputed-banksy-graffiti-
art-sold-for-1- im-in-london- 1.1403535.
122 The saga of Slave Labor (Bunting Boy) continue unabated. The American
artist Ron English purchased the piece for $730,000 at another auction in Los An-
geles on November 14, 2018 and claimed he would white wash it to discourage
others from auctioning street art. And then in Banksy-ish style he turned around
and said he would sell it for $1,000,000, that he wasn't a fool. See Henri Neuen-
dorf, Ron English Will Whitewash the $730,000 Banksy Mural He Just Bought to
Protest the Removal of Street Art, ARTNET (Nov. 15, 2018),
https://news.artnet.com/art-world/ron-english-will-whitewash-banksy- 1397023.
123 See REYBURN, supra note 112.
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
Banksy's Slave Labor (Bunting Boy) Prior to Its Removal and
Sale.124
Consider a slightly altered factual setting in the Wall Drawing #679
situation. Suppose that the LeWitt Estate, as owner of the copyright
in the visible marks, wished to obliterate the work during Stem's
life, but that Stem objected. Could the drawing be covered over an-
yway? In that setting, Stem owned the physical marks, much as the
owner of a painting owns the physical attributes of the work. The
copyright, however, would be held by others-the LeWitt Estate.
Resolution probably depends on the deal made between LeWitt and
Stem when they first arranged for installation of the work. If Stem
understood that LeWitt or his successor could hide the work when-
ever they wished, or after a certain defined period of time, or when
124 Banksy Slave Labor (Bunting Boy), London, 2012, LIVE AUCTIONEERS
(Feb. 23 , 2013) https://www.liveauctioneers.com/item/15778020 banksy-slave-
labor-bunting-boy-london-2012; see also Now Bring Back Banksy Boy: Slave La-
bour Mural Withdrawn From Auction at Last Minute, EVENING STANDARD
https://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/now-bring-back-banksy-boy-slave-
labour-mural-withdrawn-from-auction-at-last-minute-8508403.html (last Visited
Feb. 17, 2019). After the work's removal, other graffiti appeared on the site, in-
cluding a stencil warning of thieves, a picture of a frowning nun, and another im-
age (surely a Banksy) of a rat. The rat is now covered with plexiglass to protect it.
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
Stem died, or when Stem sold the house to another person, then the
terms of the deal would govern. 125 The visible installation sold to
Stem was for a limited time. And that should hold true after
LeWitt's or Stem's death as well. If the proper moment for remov-
ing the work was not reached, then covering it with a skim-coat of
plaster was inappropriate.
If nothing was said or written down between Stem and LeWitt,
then which party has priority in the decisional power ranking about
temporality? Such a decision is crucial in a setting where one or
both parties have died. That, of course, was like the case of Wall
Drawing #679 according to the Hitchcocks. Since the actual marks
on the wall were transferred to Stem when the drawing was in-
stalled, he, like the owner of a painting or a building with graffiti
on it, has control over their disposition. Unless LeWitt retained de-
struction rights when the work was made visible or there was a
clear understanding that the nature of the work was inherently tem-
porary Stem should be able to preclude removal of the drawing
from his house. While Stem was alive, his objections to obliteration
of the work would control. It would be just like the owner of the
wall upon which Banksy's Slave Labor stencil was painted arrang-
ing for the work to be cut out and sold.
But in the real world, Stem was dead and Georgia Hitchcock
purchased the house after the wall drawing had already been cov-
ered up according to the desires of the then building owner-the
Menil Collection. The Menil then stood in the shoes of Stem or
was like the owner of the building upon which Slave Labor was
stenciled. The Menil's preferences would control. Is this traditional
answer the best approach? Does moral right law have anything to
say about it? A non-artist's ability to destroy or mutilate a work, at
least during the life of the artist, rests in the hands of the artist, not
in the owner of the physical work.1 2 6 In the Wall Drawing #679
case, it was the owner of the copyright or that owner's successor
and the owner of the building wishing to destroy it, not the original
author. That is the opposite of traditional moral right claims. And
125 See 17 U.S.C. § 204 (2018). If there is a writing that obviously makes
thing easier. Indeed, [this statute] may require a writing if an exclusive right was
involved-here the right to display for a period of time.
126 See 17 U.S.C. § 106A (d) (2018).
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
what of the original artisans? If they are living authors, their inter-
ests were never considered. 1 27 Problematical? Read on.
B. MORAL RIGHTS: ATTRIBUTION, MUTILATION,
DESTRUCTION, AND RESTORATION
Three aspects of American moral right law also are relevant to
the status of works like LeWitt's Wall Drawing #679-those cov-
ering attribution, mutilation, and destruction of art works. The cop-
yright code provides that during her or his life an artist has the right
"to claim authorship" of a work of visual art1 28 and to "prevent the
use of his or her name as the author of any work of visual art which
he or she did not create." In addition, the author-the artist-of a
work of visual art may "prevent any intentional distortion, mutila-
tion, or other modification of that work which would be prejudicial
to his or her honor or reputation" and "prevent any destruction of a
work of recognized stature.' 29
These provisions are part of the Visual Artist Rights Act
(VARA) of 1990. VARA was adopted as part of a multi-year legis-
lative process allowing the United States to join the Berne Conven-
tion for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works-the pnnci-
pal international copyright agreement. 30 The convention requires
each member nation to adopt a moral right provision,' 3 ' but VARA
127 See RYZIK, supra note 113. The Banksy shredding prank is in another
world. There the artist, not the owner of the physical copy, destroyed the work.
Moral right law does not give an author authority to destroy a copy of a work over
the protests of the copy's owner.
128 See 17 U.S.C. § 101 (2018) (defining a "work of visual art"). Basically, it
limits coverage to traditional two and three-dimensional works of fine art, along
with photographs and prints made in editions of two-hundred or less that are
signed and consecutively numbered by the artist.
129 17 U.S.C. § 106A (a)(2)-(3) (2018).
130 See Berne Convention Implementation of 1988, H.R. 4262, 100th Cong.
(1988). The United States acceded to the convention after adopting the act, effec-
tive as of March 1, 1989, lacked a moral right provision. At some point, such a
provision had to be added in order to be able to claim the right to join the conven-
tion with a straight face.
1 3lId. The relevant article of the convention provides:
"Article 6b is:
(1) Independently of the author's economic rights, and
even after the transfer of the said rights, the author shall have
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
is markedly less comprehensive than moral right laws in most other
convention nations. 32 It protects only works of "visual art"'33 for
the life of the creator'3 4 and allows creators of works to waive their
moral rights. 3 5 Other member countries protect a variety of addi-
tional creative endeavors in addition to works of visual art, extend
the term of moral rights to periods beyond the life of the author,
and place significant limitations on transfer or waiver of the
the right to claim authorship of the work and to object to any
distortion, mutilation or other modification of, or other derog-
atory action in relation to, the said work, which would be
prejudicial to his honor or reputation.
(2) The rights granted to the author in accordance with
the preceding paragraph shall, after his death, be maintained,
at least until the expiry of the economic rights, and shall be
exercisable by the persons or institutions authorized by the
legislation of the country where protection is claimed. How-
ever, those countries whose legislation, at the moment of their
ratification of or accession to this Act, does not provide for
the protection after the death of the author of all the rights set
out in the preceding paragraph may provide that some of these
rights may, after his death, cease to be maintained.
(3) The means of redress for safeguarding the rights
granted by this Article shall be governed by the legislation of
the country where protection is claimed.
132 See generally ROBERTA ROSENTHAL KWALL, THE SOUL OF CREATIVITY:
FORGING A MORAL RIGHTS LAW FOR THE UNITED STATES (Stanford Univ. Press,
2009) (providing the most comprehensive analysis of moral rights in the United
States and around the world); see also Lior Zemer, Moral Rights: Limited Edition,
91 B.U. L. REV. 1519 (2011) (providing additional commentary on the weak na-
ture of American moral rights law); cf Galia Aharoni, You Can't Take It with You
When You Die ... Or Can You?: A Comparative Study of Post-Mortem Moral
Rights Statutes from Israel, France, and The United States, 17 U. BALT. INTELL.
PROP. L.J. 103 (2009) (comparing Israel and France).
133 17 U.S.C. § 101 (2010) (defining a "work of visual art"). The part of the
definition relevant here provides that this class of creative endeavors includes:
a painting, drawing, print, or sculpture, existing in a single copy, in a limited
edition of 200 copies or fewer that are signed and consecutively numbered by
the author, or, in the case of a sculpture, in multiple cast, carved, or fabricated
sculptures of 200 or fewer that are consecutively numbered by the author and
bear the signature or other identifying mark of the author.
134 17 U.S.C. § 106A(d)(1) (2018).
135 Id.
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
rights.'3 6 The reluctance of the United States to join the Berne Con-
vention for much of the twentieth century stemmed in part from an
important disagreement with much of Europe and other parts of the
world about the justification for copyright law. The Berne Conven-
tion in general and its requirement for a moral right provision in
particular arise from a sensibility that artistic endeavors should be
protected because of the inherent value-a moral imperative-of
creativity and the works it produces. Rather than using copyright to
create markets for the primary purpose of distributing works to the
greatest number of users-a deeply utilitarian instinct typically re-
cited as the purpose for American law'1 3 7 most of the rest of the
world grants copyright protection because of the intrinsic im-
portance of the work of a creative soul. The weakness of America's
VARA provisions stems largely from a continuing antagonism by
large players in the copyright marketplace toward treating artistic
endeavors as inherently worthy rather than as commercial objects
and granting authors rights that may not be transferred or sold.
Nonetheless, the strange story of Wall Drawing #679's "life" pre-
sents a setting for thinking about the relationships between VARA
and conceptual art works like those of LeWitt. This analysis, how-
ever, comes with a caveat. Since VARA provides protections only
for the life of the artist, the work of LeWitt, who died in 2007, is no
longer covered. The creations of other contemporary, living artists,
such as Banksy, continue to trigger issues taken up in this essay.
Similarly, the rights of any living artisans who installed LeWitt's
may be quite relevant.
Despite the death of LeWitt, it is worth considering his possible
role in the moral rights issues surrounding Wall Drawing #679 for
two reasons. First, other settings like the wall drawing issue contin-
ue to surface. Thinking about LeWitt may help resolve some of
those disputes involving living artists. Second, the limitation of the
moral right provisions in the United States to the life of the author
is difficult to justify. Attribution rights should not die with the au-
136 See KWALL, supra note 132, at 37-52 (summarizing various European
rules) and 106-114. French rights may last forever. In Israel, moral right is tied to
the length of the copyright term, generally life plus seventy years.
137 See Wendy J. Gordon, Fair Use as Market Failure: A Structural and Eco-
nomic Analysis of the Betamax Case and Its Predecessors, 82 COLUM. L.
REV. 1600 (1982). There is much literature about the purposes and economics of
American copyright law. This is one of the classics.
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
thor, even after their works have gone into the public domain. Why
should anyone have the audacity, let alone a protected fight, to
switch the names on a work they did not author. The willingness of
the Supreme Court to countenance such behavior in a trademark
challenge to a name switch seems untenable as a matter of both eth-
ics and traditional moral right law. 38 Thinking about the conse-
quences of lengthening the term of moral right protections is worth
it for its own sake.
1. ATTRIBUTION
Attribution rights under the Visual Artists Rights Act, 17
U.S.C. § 106A, read as follows:
(a) RIGHTS OF ATTRIBUTION AND INTEGRITY.-
Subject to section 107 and independent of the ex-
clusive rights provided in section 106, the author
of a work of visual art-
(1) shall have the fight-
(A) to claim authorship of that
work, and
(B) to prevent the use of his or her
name as the author of any work of
visual art which he or she did not
create;
(2) shall have the right to prevent the use
of his or her name as the author of the
work of visual art in the event of a distor-
tion, mutilation, or other modification of
the work which would be prejudicial to his
or her honor or reputation .... 139
Note that the rights provided by this section are separate and
apart-"independent" in the language of the statute-from standard
138 See Dastar Corp. v. Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp., 539 U.S. 23
(2003). The purveyors of a video series based on a prior series edited the tapes and
marketed them under new authorial names. How that evades censure is beyond
me.
, Visual Artists Rights Act, 1'7 U.S.C. § 106A (2018).
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
rights protected by copyright law. The sale of a copyright in a work
does not automatically include any moral rights. 140 Though such
rights may be waived by a writing signed by the author, the waiver
must be very specific about the work involved and the nature of the
rights waived. 14 1 There certainly were no waivers in the case of any
LeWitt wall drawings.
It is clear from the text of VARA that deciding authorship is
critical to determining who may seek the benefits of VARA's at-
tribution protections. The claim of the Menil Collection and the
LeWitt Estate that an uncovered Wall Drawing #679 is not a
"LeWitt" may be truer than they know. If the artisans who installed
Wall Drawing #679, for example, are still alive and they are
deemed to be authors of the derivative work, they may file a moral
right claim if the work is erroneously attributed only to LeWitt or
to no one at all. In addition, the work was, in the language of Jonna
Hitchcock, "re-inked" ten years after it was first installed. 142 What
might be the authorship status of those who, at least in part, rein-
stalled the work? Was it just a reinstallation or did the work require
a significant degree of expressive talent? It is therefore possible
that attribution under VARA would be due to LeWitt, the original
installers, and the re-inkers, at least as long as any of them was
alive when the piece was covered and perhaps later restored. 143 In
this and other cases proper attribution of authorship may extend to
more than one person.144 The second attribution problem involves
140 The sale of a standard painting is, therefore, much more complex than
most people realize. The purchaser typically buys the canvas and the right to trans-
fer the canvas, but nothing else. That leaves behind the copyright in the painting
and the moral rights in the painting. The copyright would be held by the artist or
the artist's successors in interest. The moral right would be held by the artist dur-
ing life in the absence of a very specific waiver. The three parts of the transaction
would be covered by different contracts and different contractual provisions.
141 See 17 U.S.C. § 106A(e) (1990).
142 See HALPERIN, supra note 10. LeWitt apparently wished that his works be
kept as fresh as possible. If they were to remain visible for significant periods of
time they typically were reworked. See also CHRISTIE'S, supra note 50.
143 See CHUSED, supra note 89, at 608. In another article, Ijoined the group of
writers critiquing VARA's limitation to the life of an author.
144 See Wall Drawing 289, MASS. MOCA,
https://MASSMoCA.org/event/walldrawing289/ (last visited Feb. 14, 2019). Inter-
estingly enough, for some but not all public displays of LeWitt wall drawings, the
artisans actually installing the work are listed on the plaque next to the work.
Compare Wall Drawing #3 72F, YALE UNIVERSITY ART GALLERY,
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
not the discovery of those who actually authored some or all
LeWitt installation, but the impact of uncovering Wall Drawing
#679. Will the newly revealed work not be a "LeWitt" as the Menil
Collection and those overseeing LeWitt's estate now claim?
As noted above, the Menil Collection and LeWitt Estate have
taken the position that any reappearance of the marks once making
up Wall Drawing #679 would not result in the visibility of a
"LeWitt," but random marks on the surface of a wall. 45 Presuma-
bly, therefore, they contend that the Hitchcocks may not attribute
the markings on the wall to "LeWitt." Can an artist disclaim au-
thorship of work that is intended to last a limited period, covered
up at the behest of or with the acquiescence of the artist, and later
restored? Can authorship be disclaimed if the copyright owner in-
tends the work to last a limited time or asks that it be destroyed?
Does the fact that the artist or a successor in interest-here the
Menil Collection and the LeWitt Estate-may have damaged the
drawing when they tried to obliterate it make a difference?
Similar issues are raised by Banksy's refusals to authenticate
some works removed from their original locations and sold. At
least for some auction houses and galleries, inability to create a
firm provenance for a work is the kiss of death. Sales of some
works very likely to be by Banksy have failed as a result. 146 In the
Toronto case of Muzzled Dog,147 could Banksy claim the work is no
longer his because it was removed from its original location, re-
stored, installed in an elaborate vitrine radically different from its
https://artgallery.yale.edu/collections/objects/236948 (last visited Feb. 14, 2019)
(comparing the online display of Wall Drawing #289 at MASS MoCA where the
installers are noted with the display of Wall Drawing #372F at Yale, where the
artisans are not noted online).
145 See supra p. 15-16.
146 See Isaac Kaplan, A Banksy Appears on a Building Overnight. Who Gets
to Cash In?, ARTSY (Mar. 30, 2018), https://www.artsy.net/article/artsy-editorial-
banksy-appears-building-overnight-cash-in. ; Danielle Rahm, Banksy: The $20
Million Dollar Graffiti Artist Who Doesn't Want His Art to be Worth Anything,
FORBES (Oct. 22, 2013 12:35PM),
https://www.forbes.com/sites/daniellerahm/2013/10/22/banksy-the-20-million-
graffiti-artist-who-doe snt-want-his-art-to -be -worth-anything/#7d4 19d9b6 iba;
Rachael Corbett, Keszler & Banksy: Pest Control Stymies Keszler Gallery Salesi,
ARTNET (Oct. 12, 2011),
http://www.artnet.com/magazineus/features/corbett/keszler-banksy-10- 12-11 .asp.
147 See supra p. 20.
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
original placement, and ensconced in a spot designed to enhance
the money-making potential of the York Street development?
This is virtually unchartered territory.14 Much contemporary
art is intended to be temporary. Installations come and go. Exterior
wall art (a.k.a. graffiti) is often written and overwritten with the
permission or acquiescence of the artists. And, of course, many
LeWitt wall drawings come and go as exhibitions open and close.
Efforts to recover temporary art works after they disappear are rare,
but they do occur. In addition to Wall Drawing #679, some Banksy
creations have been restored. Sometimes, as in Toronto, they are
moved. In other cases, as with Snorting Copper in London's East
End, they are returned to their original location after painstaking,
expensive restorations. And here too the question of whether the
work is still a "Banksy" has been posed. 14 9
There is, however, a critical difference between the case of
LeWitt's Wall Drawing #679 and Banksy's Snorting Copper. The
covering over of the LeWitt was at the instance of the owner (or at
least one of them) of the copyright in the work and with the per-
mission of the owner of the wall upon which it was installed. The
Banksy was never mutilated or covered at the behest of the artist,
though he surely knew it was likely to be marred. It resided in the
graffiti world. Rather it was damaged and covered with paint and
plywood by various actors. And the community council in the area
was not particularly interested in its continued existence shortly af-
ter it first appeared. Both its hiding and its restoration proceeded
without comment from Banksy. Nonetheless, though he never said
anything about its authenticity or his role in creating it, Snorting
Copper is widely recognized as a "Banksy." Given its return to the
original location there is not an ongoing dispute about its authentic-
148 See Sinclaire Marber, They Can't Take That Away from Me, 41 COLuM.
J.L. & ARTS 319 (2018). This article nibbles most closely to the moral right attrib-
ution issues on the table here is a note. See also Nathan M. Davis, As Good as
New: Conserving Artwork and the Destruction of Aoral Rights, 29 CARDOZO ARTS
& ENT. L.J. 215 (2011). The Marber note's primary focus was on providing a rem-
edy to those harmed by inappropriate denials of authenticity or authorship. Davis
wrote about conflicts between conservation and moral rights claims.
149 Banksy's Snorting Copper Back On The Beat After Restoration, BBC (Oct.
6, 2017), https://www.bbc.com/news/uk-england-41391021. The image and cap-
tion are by BBC and the news article poses the question about whether the work is
still a "Banksy."
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
ity. But if Banksy ever declares the restoration of Snorting Copper
so altered the work that it is no longer his and its owner nonetheless
portrays it as a "Banksy" would Banksy have a moral rights claim?
Chns Bull and his team worked for several months to restore the
piece which had "seen better days."
The statute provides an author with the right to prevent both "the
use of his or her name as the author of any work of visual art which
he or she did not create" 150 and "the use of his or her name as the
author of the work of visual art in the event of a distortion, mutila-
tion, or other modification of the work which would be prejudicial
to his or her honor or reputation.' 15 ' Both subsections might apply
in cases like this; the first is the focus of attention here. Banksy's
Snorting Copper was so seriously compromised by its treatment
over the decade between its creation and rediscovery that the con-
servators were not sure they could bring it back to its original ap-
pearance. Such restoration work may not be a "distortion, mutila-
tion, or other modification" violating moral right,15 2 but may the
150 17 U.S.C. § 106A(a)(1)(B) (2018).
151 17 U.S.C. § 106A(a)(2) (2018).
152 Id. (declaring that "[t]he modification of a work of visual art which is the
result of conservation, or of the public presentation, including lighting and place-
ment, of the work is not a destruction, distortion, mutilation, or other modification
described in subsection (a)(3) unless the modification is caused by gross negli-
gence"). By its terms this subsection only applies to works that are mutilated or
destroyed under § 106A(a)(3), but courts might apply a similar norm to (a)(2) vio-
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
work no longer be attributed to Banksy because he did not create
the restoration? Or, similarly, is the restored and relocated Muzzled
Dog still a Banksy? Or in the tale most central to this essay, may
Wall Drawing #679 no longer be attributed to LeWitt or the install-
ers because he or they didn't do it or because it was never intended
to be permanent?
There is an important sense in which the intent of an author
controls the availability of copyright protection and the use of the
label "author." Suppose, for example, a widely admired artist ven-
tures into an art supply store and purchases a blank 4' x 4' canvas
made of roughly woven linen, takes it back to her studio, and leans
it against a wall. At that point, I don't think anyone would claim
that the artist has authored a work of visual art. But suppose that
this well-known artist-deeply involved in the making of concep-
tual art-hangs the unframed blank canvas on the wall of an im-
portant gallery as part of an exhibition, places a plaque on the wall
next to it designating its title as Blank Canvas #600 in Ecru, and
adds a copyright notice to the wall plaque (leaving the canvas total-
ly blank) with the name of the artist and the year of its creation. At
that point might the canvas be a graphic work of visual art?
lations in order to make some reasonable sense of the statutory language. But
(a)(1)(B) claims only require the artist to show the she or he did not "create" the
work. That might be the case with a work that was quite seriously damaged by
human actions before its restoration).
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
I'm reminded of Marcel Duchamp's famous Fountain, origi-
nally exhibited in 1917 at Alfred Stieglitz's gallery 291. The work
consisted of a porcelain urinal signed "R. Mutt." The whereabouts
of the original is not known. But Duchamp later authorized the
making of sixteen copies that are now in museums scattered all
over the world. An image of the original is pictured here. 153 Foun-
tain is widely viewed as one of the most important art works of the
twentieth century. It loosened traditional constraints about the use
of materials and formats. Found objects of all sorts became fodder
for creative endeavors. Sculpture, collage, multimedia, and all sorts
of other works using everyday items became commonplace. In such
works, the intention of an artist can transform a "nothing" into a
Csomething."
If the nature of a person's intention helps explain at least part
of the line between making something that is not a copyrightable
object and authoring a work properly called an original work of
153 See Marcel Duchamp, Fountaine, WIKIMEDIA COMMONS,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Duchamp Fountaine.jpg (last visited
Feb. 14, 2019). The image is sourced from THE BLIND MAN: NEw YORK DADA NO.
2, at 4 (Henri-Pierre Roche, Beatrice Wood, & Marcel Duchamp eds., 19 7).
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
"art," why can't the opposite notion-an intention to terminate or
destroy-help describe the difference between an authored art work
and an item without an authorial parent? There are arguments on
both sides. On the one hand, both the wall drawing and Snorting
Copper are clearly recognizable as restored works of the original
artists. There is no sense in which others have taken liberties with
the original designs or motifs of the works. (That is much less so
with respect to Muzzled Dog.) The restoration work done on the
Banksy was of high quality and that planned for the LeWitt is like-
ly to be top notch. Both involve respect for the aesthetic instincts
and goals of the artist. Perhaps, therefore, they are not different
from most of the now extant works of Kafka. The author, while
deathly ill with tuberculosis in 1917, asked his literary agent Max
Brod to bum all of his unpublished manuscripts after the disease
worked its will. 1 5 4 Brod elected not to do so and oversaw their pub-
lication. The Trial and other works became some of the most im-
portant literary masterpieces of the twentieth century. Would any-
one dare claim today that they may not be attributed to Kafka just
because he wished them to be destroyed?
On the other hand, the original understanding and intention of
the artist and others (including the artisans?) associated with the
creation of the LeWitt wall drawing was that it should or would
disappear at some point. In the case of LeWitt's Wall Drawing
#679, the Menil Collection and the LeWitt Estate contend it was
always the desire of William Stem and the others associated with
his gift to the Menil Collection to cover up the work after Stem
died and his house was put on the market. And they actually put
that intention into effect, or at least tried to do so. And in the case
of Banksy, he, like many accomplished wall artists, assumed it was
highly likely his public work would be obliterated by other artists,
"pests," building owners, or public authorities. And, here too, that
typically happened. In short, very strong arguments may be made
that artists' expectations, like their expressed intentions, about the
ways their work will or may be destroyed should govern the lon-
gevity of their creations, especially if they actually are obliterated.
That was an important argument I have made elsewhere-
contending that the opinion denying 5Pointz artists preliminary re-
154 See Lior Jacob Strahilevitz, The Right to Destroy, 114 YALE L.J. 781, 830-
831 (2005).
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
lief to halt destruction of their aerosol work was erroneously rea-
soned.155 And if artists should have such control, why is a "resur-
rected" work not the same as a work made by an infringing appro-
priation artist "cloning" the work of another.156 If an artist intends a
work to "die" at some point, it is appropriate to suggest that anyone
who makes it last longer or brings it back from the dead has "creat-
ed" a work not made by the original author. Though The Trial is
one of the cherished reads in western literature, perhaps Brod
should not have preserved it. Or, perhaps better put, perhaps neither
the restored Wall Drawing #679 nor The Trial may be attributed to
LeWitt, the artisans, or Kafka. The Trial may be best described and
attributed as a novel once written by Kafka, but now the resurrected
work of Brod's intentions! 1 5 7
155 See RUDICK, supra note 27, at 596-599.
156 Sturtevant: Double Trouble, MUSEUM OF MODERN ART (Nov. 29, 2014-
Feb. 22, 2015), https://www.moma.org/calendar/exhibitions/1454 (last visited Feb.
14, 2019). Some fairly well-known artists have been quite successful in cloning
work. They are very adept at adopting the styles and techniques of others to dupli-
cate their works. Elaine Sturtevant, whose work was exhibited at the Museum of
Modem Art in New York not long ago, is a prime example. Her 2014 show is
memorialized at Sturtevant: Double Trouble. See JAMES AGEE & WALKER EVANS,
LET US NOW PRAISE FAMOUS MEN (1941). Sherrie Levine often operates in a relat-
ed fashion, but sometimes uses photography to redisplay the work of others. Her
most famous pictures are copies of the images taken by Walker Evans and pub-
lished in this book. Metropolitan Museum of Art. See After Walker Evans 4, THE
MET, https://www.metmuseum.org/art/collection/search/267214 (last visited Feb.
14, 2019). The photographs are now in the collection of the Metropolitan Museum
of Modem Art. See also The Legal Culture ofAppropriation Art: The Future of
Copyright in the Remix Age, 17 TULANE J. TECH. & INTELL. PROP. 163 (2014). The
work of Sturtevant and Levine is quite different from other appropriation artists,
such as Shepard Fairey, Richard Prince, or Jeff Koons who make use of the work
of others but typically make changes to suit their personal fancies and whims. Not
surprisingly Levine, Fairey, Prince, and Koons all have been involved in copyright
litigation.
157 Kafka, of course, is far from the only creative soul who wished to destroy
or actually destroyed their own work. The list is long. See M. H. Miller, From
Claude Monet to Banksy, Why Do Artists Destroy Their Own Work?, THE NEW
YORK TIMES (Mar. 11, 2019), https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/ll/t-
magazine/artists-destroy-past-work. html.
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
2. MUTILATION AND ATTRIBUTION OF RESURRECTED
TEMPORARY WORK
As noted above, an artist also may disclaim authorship of a
work "in the event of a distortion, mutilation, or other modification
of the work which would be prejudicial to his or her honor or repu-
tation."'158 Restoration work, however, is not deemed to be distor-
tion, mutilation, or modification unless it is done in a grossly negli-
gent fashion.1 59 The first consideration is whether restoration work
performed to resurrect a "dead" work intended to have less than an
eternal life is a distortion, mutilation, or modification that is preju-
dicial to the artist's reputation. The most frequently cited case on
the reputation issue is Carter v. Helmsley-Spear, Inc. 160 Using
common meanings given to the phrase "prejudicial to the honor or
reputation of the artists," the court concluded that reputation may
refer to both the artist and the work in issue and that the artist need
not be well known to claim rights under VARA. Rather, the focus
is on whether alteration or mutilation of a work "would cause inju-
ry or damage to plaintiffs' good name, public esteem, or reputation
in the artistic community. "161 Reputational harm does not neces-
sarily refer to lowering of esteem, but to changes in public percep-
tions not intended by the author. Here too there are quite tenable
arguments on both sides.
While the Carter test provides a broad, liberal construction of
the statute, the temporary aspect of works like Wall Drawing #679
creates special problems quite distinct from Carter; that case did
not involve temporary qualities of artistic endeavors. Restoring a
temporal work deemed "terminated," for example, actually may
enhance the artistic reputation of the artist by making a creation
visible to a wider audience for a significantly longer period of time.
Even if a work is under appreciated today, its importance may be
recognized by future generations. In addition, the very idea that
competently restoring a work is equivalent to mutilating it seems
158 17 U.S.C. § 106A(a)(2) (2019).
159 See 17 U.S.C. § 106A(c)(2) (2019).
160 There are three reported opinions in the case, see Carter v. Helmsley-
Spear, Inc., 71 F.3d 77 (2d Cir. 1995); Carter v. Helmsley-Spear, Inc., 861 F.
Supp. 303 (S.D.N.Y. 1994); Carterv. Helmsley-Spear, Inc., 852 F. Supp. 228
(S.D.N.Y. 1994).
161 Carter, 861 F. Supp. at 323.
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
facially preposterous and contrary to the terms of the statute. Doing
so, the argument goes, hardly diminishes the reputation of an artist.
Rather, the new visibility of the work makes its creativity available
to larger numbers of people for longer periods of time, thereby en-
hancing its renown.
But, reputation, as Carter makes clear, measures an array of
qualities other than the aesthetic appeal or longevity of a work.
Good name and public esteem can refer to the qualities of the artist
as a creative, inventive, interesting soul. If a work's temporal quali-
ty is inherent in the creativity of an artist and that quality is ignored
or undermined, a strong argument may be made that the good name
and esteem of the artist have been diminished. If this idea is taken
seriously the resurrection of a work intended to be time-limited is
not a restoration but a "mutilation" of the artist's aesthetic inten-
tions. That intention is overridden just as surely as a grossly negli-
gent restoration harms the contours of a traditional work designed
to last as long as possible.
The most recent dispute raising questions about the sorts of res-
torations which may be grossly negligent was filed by Cady Noland
against a range of parties involved in the reworking of her 1990
Log Cabin Facade in 2010 pictured below.162 In 1991 she gave
permission to the owner of the object, Wilhelm Schurmann, to stain
it in a dark color. The stained version also is pictured below. 16 3
162 See Julia Halperin & Eileen Kinsella, Cady Noland Sues Three Galleries
for Copyright Infringement Over Disavowed Log Cabin Sculpture, ARTNET NEWS
(Jul. 21, 2017), https://news.artnet.com/art-world/cady-noland-copyright-
infringement-log-cabin-1030649. The unstained image is from the complaint. See
also Second Amended Complaint, Noland v. Galerie Michael Janssen, 5, Civil
Action No. 1:l17-cv-05452-JPO, (S.D.N.Y. May 29, 2018). An interesting side of
this case is that the Copyright Office has refused to register a copyright for the
work on the ground that it is not original. I find that conclusion stunningly wrong.
Everyday objects can be art. The fact that the front looks like a cabin and is made
out of common materials is not decisive if the work is intended as artistic, placed
in an unusual setting or in a museum environment, and is impossible to use as a
utilitarian object. See Letter from Karyn A. Temple, U.S. Copyright Review
Board, to Andrew Epstein, Esq., (on file with author) available at
https://www.copyright.gov/rulings-filings/review-board/docs/log-cabin.pdf (last
visited Feb. 14, 2019).
163 This image is from Reconsideration for Refusal to Register Log Cabin.
There also is another issue buried in this dispute. The Copyright Office has refused
to register the work on the ground that it is not original. I find this conclusion
stunningly wrong. Common, everyday objects have been used in art for over a
20191
"TEMPORARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
Schurmann, with the permission of Noland, then allowed it to be
displayed outdoors by a museum in Aachen, Germany. It was
placed directly on the ground for a significant period of time during
which it deteriorated. 1 64
She now claims that the owner and museum were grossly negligent
in not insuring that the work was properly cared for, that the "resto-
ration" replacing most of the wood with new logs went forward
without any consultation with her and was unnecessarily compre-
hensive by replacing wood with fresh material, that her honor or
reputation was injured, and that the resulting object was an infring-
ing copy rather than her original work.
'This is not a restoration-this is a copy,' Noland's
lawyer Andrew Epstein told ArtNet News. By dis-
carding the rotting logs and wooden elements that
made up the cabin's facade and replacing them with
century. If presented with an intention to treat the object as artistic, in a setting like
a museum or gallery where aesthetics typically is invoked, and widely recognized
by others as a pictorial, sculptural, or graphic work, it is original. The mere fact
that it is made of common objects is not decisive. This has been true since Marcel
Duchamp's famous use of urinal as an artistic object. The original has been lost.
The Tate Modem in London, along with other important institutions, holds one of
sixteen replicas made with the artist's permission. See Marcel Duchamp, The
Fountain (1917, replica 1964), TATE,
https://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/duchamp-fountain-t07573 (last visited Feb.
14, 2019).
164 SECOND AMENDED COMPLAINT, supra note 161, 25-34.
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
new ones, the conservator essentially destroyed the
original work and created an unauthorized repro-
duction, according to the lawsuit.
'Wood can be restored, even rotting wood,' Epstein
said. "This is a forgery.' 165
Noland's case raises questions much like those in the LeWitt prob-
lem. Under what circumstances does a restoration move beyond the
intention of those involved in the creation of a work, either by
bringing a temporary work back to life or by taking drastic steps to
bring a work back to something like its original appearance. And
will such undertakings sometimes reach such a profound level that
they prejudice the honor or reputation of the artist? In restoring
temporary works or totally replacing materials without authoriza-
tion, I think, the artists have strong attribution claims. The Menil
Collection, therefore, may be correct in claiming that a restored
Wall Drawing #679 may not be attributed to LeWitt. And, I might
add, attribution to the artisans may also be inappropriate.
3. WORKS IN OR ON BUILDINGS: MUTILATION AND
DESTRUCTION
Special moral right rules apply to works "in or on" buildings.
17 U.S.C. § 106A(a)(3) provides protections against "intentional
distortion, mutilation, or other modification of that work which
would be prejudicial to his or her honor or reputation" and "any de-
struction of a work of recognized stature." These "integrity" claims
are separate and apart from attribution rights, but inapplicable un-
der certain circumstances. 17 U.S.C. § 113(d) provides that if"a
work of visual art has been incorporated in or made part of a build-
ing in such a way that removing the work from the building will
cause the destruction, distortion, mutilation, or other modification
of the work as described in section 106A(a)(3)," and "the author
consented to the installation of the work in the building" under the
165 Mueller v. Janssen Gallery, 225 F. Supp. 3d 201 (S.D.N.Y. 2017). No-
land's claim that the work was no longer hers led the owner of the object to sue
those involved in the $1,400,000 sale to him to compensate for the reduced value
of the work. Noland had notified in 2010 that after the work that was done on the
sculpture she disclaimed authorship. The owner's claim was dismissed, the court
holding that no fiduciary duty was owned to the purchaser.
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
terms of a written contract recognizing that the building owner has
the right to destroy the work, then mutilation and destruction rights
do not apply.166
While the applicability of these provisions to traditional art
works is clear, their implication for certain types of temporary
works, including the often temporary installations of conceptual art,
is much fuzzier. Destroying a work before the temporal limits on its
existence occur surely violates the statute. If, for example, part of a
public sculpture exhibition intended to last six months is installed
at various street locations in a city and is damaged or destroyed, the
artist has a claim. But what about restoring a work intended by its
artist to be short lived and covered over at her behest? Is that "mu-
tilation" or "destruction" of the artist's intentions and therefore of
the underlying work? The same basic theories apply to analysis of
the mutilation arm of this rule as those described above with re-
spect to attribution. But with destruction of a work, the moral rights
test is a different. Reputational inquiries shift to questions about
whether the work is of "recognized stature." 67 This legal construct
also has been construed broadly to include not just the judgments
of art aficionados but also of a large array of people in the broader
community. There is no doubt that LeWitt and many other concep-
tual artists fulfill this arm of the statute. But as with mutilation, it is
difficult to wrap one's mind around the idea that bringing a work
back to life is its destruction. How can the resurrection of a dead
work be its demise? As long as the restoration is performed in a
competent way, we will be blessed with the presence of a work for
a significant period of time into the future. On the other hand, if the
contours of a work include its anticipated demise, isn't its contin-
ued or revived existence a destruction of the artist's intentions? If a
work is designed to be depleted over time but is maintained in its
original "virgin" state indefinitely, doesn't that destroy a central
conception of the work? 16
166 17 U. S.C. § 113(d)(2). In addition, there is a provision allowing the owner
of a building to give the artist 90 days to remove a work "which can be removed
from the building without the destruction, distortion, mutilation, or other modifica-
tion of the work."
167 17 U.S.C. § 106A(c)(2) (2019); See also Cohenv. G&M Realty, L.P., 320
F. Supp. 3d 421 (E.D.N.Y. 2018).
168 See Discussion of Felix Gonzalez-Torres, supra note 26.
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
Consider again the previously described De Koo-
ning/Rauschenberg drawing episode.'6 9 When De Kooning agreed
to give Rauschenberg a drawing to erase, it is safe to say that nei-
ther intended it to be "reborn." Indeed, that was the point. Togeth-
er, they intended to participate in the use of one work to create an-
other, to destroy one work to give life to a second. In this setting,
"restoring" the original De Kooning work literally requires the de-
struction of the Rauschenberg project. Wouldn't that violate the in-
tegrity rights of both artists? Or think about Urs Fischer who is fa-
mous for crafting large wax candle sculptures, lighting them, and
letting them turn into puddles of wax on the floor. One of the most
famous involves wax figures of a man with hands in his pockets
staring at a huge replica of Giambologna's famous sculpture, Rape
of the Sabine Women.' 7 Can these works, forcing us to think about
the temporary qualities of artistic preferences, to say nothing of life
itself, legitimately be restored without agreement of the artist? Is
LeWitt's Wall Drawing #679 any different? While it's restoration
would not involve the destruction of a new work of visual art, it ar-
guably would have a similar result. If LeWitt, like De Kooning and
Fischer before him, contemplated the obliteration of a wall drawing
or sculpture even as it was being installed for the first time, wasn't
that part of his artistic endeavor?
V. CONCLUSION
Substantial cultural questions underlie much of the discussion
in this essay. Finding the best answers for making decisions about
conceptual art, therefore, may be just as likely to surface by prob-
ing the propriety of restoration as in plumbing the depths of tradi-
tional legal analysis. What is the right thing to do? Much of the lit-
erature about the ethics of restoring or conserving creative works
169 See supra p. 17.
170 See Jonathan Jones, Time Flies at the Venice Biennale, THE GUARDIAN
(June 7, 2011),
https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/201 1/jun/07/time-
venice-biennale-marclay-fischer (The work was on display at the Venice Biennale
in 2011.); see Pinar, Classic Sculpture Replica is a Giant Burning Candle: MY
MODERN MET (July 2, 2012), https://mymodemnet.com/urs-fischer-the-rape-of-
the-sabine-women-untitled/ (This site contains images of the work in various stag-
es of its decomposition.).
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
involves traditional art-typically the propriety of removing some
or all of the material placed on a work in prior restoration efforts or
of placing new substances on an old work to bring it closer to its
original appearance. But the arrival of various types of modem and
conceptual art in the last century has spawned a new set of con-
cerns. Should a public work of Banksy that has deteriorated or dis-
appeared beneath the depredations and paints of others be brought
back to life? May the work of Urs Fischer be rebuilt, lit, and melt to
the floor? Should we allow restoration of a temporary work that is
covered but not destroyed by the artist or the artist's successor?
Should we allow a work designated as not for sale to be sold?
Should work that was intentionally designed as a deteriorating ob-
ject be preserved in a certain state? Should the Hitchcocks restore
Wall Drawing #679 or leave it buried?
Though probing questions of propriety can be as slippery as in-
vestigating legal norms, a different lens may provide a helpful con-
clusory point of view. Conceptual art like LeWitt's, as its name
suggests, arises from a thought process, not from an actual physical
manifestation of a work. LeWitt, of course, carefully stated in his
certificates and diagrams that they were not actual wall drawings.
They offered the general parameters of a project. And he carefully
argued in his Paragraphs on Conceptual Art that his goal was to
create plans, not traditional two- or three-dimensional art objects. I
have opined here that the intention of an artist is an important con-
sideration in attempting to figure out how best to cope with the al-
teration, deterioration, or reconstruction of a conceptual work no
longer in its original condition. 17 1 Others, much better schooled
than I in the non-legal, cultural, and ethical problems associated
with restoration and conservation of modern and contemporary art,
also have used intention as a guide. 2
Intention, of course, also may be a slippery notion-not just
because discerning motivations may be difficult, but also because
many restoration decisions must be made long after an artist dies.
Even if the American moral rights provisions were altered to ex-
tend protections beyond an author's life, the problem of discerning
whether a work was supposed to be allowed to disintegrate might
... See supra p. 23-26.
172 See David A. Scott, ART: AUTHENTICITY, RESTORATION, FORGERY 384-409
(2016).
RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL
[Vol. 45
be challenging. Those sorts of issues permeate the life of Wall
Drawing #679. In many ways it is the ineffable qualities of
LeWitt's intentions about the work, or the intentions of others in-
volved in its installation on a wall, that have made this essay so dif-
ficult to craft or confine in traditional categories. It is easy to claim
that in general LeWitt understood his drawings would often come
and go, that he often approved of multiple successive installations
of any particular work, and that he found absolutely nothing moral-
ly or ethically wrong with allowing destruction of installed two-
dimensional works. Quite the contrary. The concept, the plan, was
the important thing for him. The end product was nice, but poten-
tially repetitive and not always the same in each iteration.
But it's what we don't know that causes so much consternation.
LeWitt died before Stem. No written contractual understandings
between the artist and William Stem about any limits on the visible
life of the wall drawing have surfaced. In the absence of specific
knowledge of their frame of mind when the work was installed in
1991, it is difficult to determine precisely what their intentions
might have been about covering over the work when the house was
sold in 2014. Nor is it easy to discern what they might have al-
lowed Dr. Hitchcock to do after she purchased the property. Ab-
stracted from what we know about the events surrounding the crea-
tion, maintenance, sale, and attempted destruction of #679, and the
conceptual characteristics of LeWitt's work, its demise may well
have been intended. We can say with a certain degree of confidence
that skim-coating the work was not out of the bounds of propriety
for either LeWitt or the Menil Collection. We have no knowledge
about what the artisans doing the installation might have preferred.
But its restoration is another matter. On that score we are without
guidance. Restoration preferences for the various actors in the dra-
ma are nowhere in the public record. Even if everyone would agree
that the preferences of the artist, artisans, and various owners
should be considered, we can only make intelligent guesses about
their consensus, if one existed. While we might conclude that
LeWitt would have viewed the visible life of the covered wall
drawing as over and therefore that restoration is inappropriate, that
result is no easier to justify than accepting its revelation as legiti-
mate.
In short, conceptual art is a relatively new frontier and it is not
easy to fathom what some notion of substituted or constructed in-
20191
"TEMPoRARY" CONCEPTUAL ART
tent or desire might look like in this setting. It is one thing to say
that LeWitt presumed his installations often disappeared. But it is
quite another to construct an intention that such a disappearance
was anticipated for Wall Drawing #679 upon Stem's death or the
sale of the house to a third party. Nor is it possible to know what he
might have thought about an effort to restore the now invisible in-
stallation. It certainly is plausible to suggest that the well-known
understanding that his wall drawings often were temporary implied
an intention to not bring them back to life in the same place by re-
storing the obliterated marks on a wall. But there is no way to know
if that is an appropriate reflection of what he might have said if
asked. In short, the conservation and restoration world, now often
confronted with questions about whether to accept destructive in-
tentions of artists, ignore them, or delay them, is at loggerheads
with itself about how to proceed. 173
But there is another, and perhaps equally important considera-
tion. Even if an artist's purposes, aims, and objectives are well un-
derstood, even if intentions are very clear, it may still be difficult to
discern the best ethical result. Brod's rescue of now classic works
of Kafka is hardly the only example of a case where, at least in
hind sight, most would say that overriding the desires of an author
were proper. Scott tells the story of Edvard Munch, who was "in-
terested in the defects of change and decay of his own work." He
sometimes painted on cheap materials that naturally deteriorated
over time or left work out in the yard while the weather accentuated
the process of decay. "Munch took the view that his paintings had
to fend for themselves in the organic process of their own degrada-
tion. When one of his many versions of The Scream (1893) was
stolen and later recovered in a damaged condition, it is generally
agreed that the artist's intention would have resulted in the recov-
ered painting being left in that condition."'174 But it was immediate-
ly placed in the hands of conservators, perhaps to the delight of
contemporary art aficionados. So even if our instincts suggest that
LeWitt would have preferred to remove Wall Drawing #679 from
the Stem house when it was sold, his work may be of such great,
overriding importance that its rediscovery should immediately lead
to it being placed in the hands of restoration artisans. Perhaps that
173 See Scott, supra note 171.
174 SCOTT, supra note 171 at 397.
68 RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECHNOLOGY LAW JOURNAL [Vol. 45
is the best place to end this journey-with a raft of legal and ethical
conundrums for the art world to ponder.







from http://www.djsphotography.co.uk/Tropical%20Forests/Sulawesi%20Macaques.htm:


DJS PHOTOGRAPHY

                        wildlife,  NATURE,  Environment,  PHOTOGRAPHY WORKSHOPS

Sulawesi macaques...

 

Sulawesi has 7 different macaque species on the island, each occupying rather small ranges that interlock like a jigsaw.  Why there is little direct competition for food or territotial disputes is a mystery, and perhaps we humans have something to learn from them about peaceful co-existence with other cultures?  

   

 

Sulawesi Macaque copyright David J Slater

   

Crested black macaque    Macaca nigra

 

An amazingly photogenic species of monkey confined to the volcanic dry tropical forest in the far north of Sulawesi.

They are more amazing due to their very human-like characteristics, not least their "punk" hairdo, but they are also very inquisitive and clever. But their piercing red eyes seal the fascination for me; Mesmerising yet un-nerving when they make eye contact with you - a memory of our ancient ancestors?

 

Sulawesi Macaque copyright David J Slater

 

They are critically endangered thanks mainly to us humans - from forest clearance for houses and farms, persecution for their habit of crop raiding, and poaching for bushmeat.  Indeed, they can still be found as bushmeat at local markets.  A once shuned meat source due to Muslim perspectives, but with the rise of Catholicism on the island, the meat as once again become profit making.  Below is a pic of a potentially doomed close relative, a male Booted Macaque (I didn't get a trapped crested macaque thankfully!).  I say potentially because I got him released for a 20 pence packet of cigarettes as a bribe.  The value on these monkeys lives is astonishingly low...

 

Sulawesi Macaque copyright David J Slater 

 

 

They are very gregarious just like us humans, devoting a large part of their time to play, sitting about and general socialising, but they also spend a lot of time on the forest floor moving between fruiting trees such as fig or the notoriously smelly Durian or Jack Fruit tre (below)..they also need to feed like us, albeit in a diminishing space taken over by us.....

 

Sulawesi Macaque copyright David J Slater

 

Despite their generally placid nature disputes sometimes break out but are short lived. 

And despite them having formidable large canine teeth as weapons, they prefer to use their hands to reprimand their relatives.

 

 

 

Sulawesi Macaque copyright David J Slater

 

 

 

In my effort to get some good photos I decided to try and shadow a troup for three days, moving with them until exhausted enough to return to my basic accommodation nearby.  Each day I would be off shortly after dawn trying to relocate them, which I did with the help of a local guide who I had been told was the man who had worked with the macaques the longest.  Human contact with wildlife so often ends in misery, but not this time.  I love wildlife and want to do all I can to coexist peacefully with them.  I must have connected with them a message of unconditional love and understanding.....

 

 

Sulawesi Macaque copyright David J Slater

 

 

 

 

 

It was about midday on the second day and the monkeys, about 25 strong of all ages, halted for a rest and a grooming session.  It had been a hard day as usual, slashing through tangled and very humid jungle, climbing over and squating under fallen trees, all with a 20kg backpack on full of expensive camera gear.  I sat close by them, camera at the ready as always. I must have tuned in to them, because after some time a few brave monkeys began to come closer, and slowly but surely began paying me more attention.  I held out my hand and WOW, one held my hand back. Shock!  This went on for maybe 15 minutes.  They started to groom me, picking through my hair as I knelt on the ground, hunched over my camera, but desperate to record it all.  I knew about monkey etiquette from many previous encounters around the world, and this made that knowledge so much more than worthwhile.

 

I decided to set up the camera on a beanbag on a log, self-timer all set. I was afraid they would run off of course, but they didn't.  Rather, they grabbed my camera!  Quick thinking had my guide rushing to save it - lesson learnt.  Setting up the camera again, some of the cheekier monkeys had now got bored, and now even my guide had wandered off for a smoke.  I was alone and had to encourage the monkeys back to me for my intended contact experience photo.  Soon enough, I was jokingly asking for his help again as the monkeys looked increasingly cheeky as they touched the camera with that glint in their piercing red eyes.  It was now that I heard some frames reeled off when my guide struggled to keep the camera from little monkey fingers - the scene was set.

 

I wanted to keep my new found friends happy and with me.  I now wanted to get right in their faces with a wide angle lens, but that was proving too difficult as they were nervous of something - I couldn't tell what.  So I put my camera on a tripod with a very wide angle lens, settings configured such as predictive autofocus, motorwind, even a flashgun, to give me a chance of a facial close up if they were to approach again for a play.  I duly moved away and bingo, they moved in, fingering the toy, pressing the buttons and fingering the lens.  I was then to witness one of the funniest things ever as they grinned, grimaced and bared teeth at themselves in the reflection of the large glassy lens. Was this what they where afraid of earlier?  Perhaps also the sight of the shutter planes moving within the lens also amused or scared them?  They played with the camera until of course some images were inevitably taken!  I had one hand on the tripod when this was going on, but I was being prodded and poked by would be groomers and a few playful juveniles who nibbled at my arms.  Eventually the dominant male at times became over excited and eventually gave me a whack with his hand as he bounced off my back.  I new then that I had to leave before I possibly got him too upset.  The whole experiance lasted about 30 minutes.

 

It was like the joy of seeing your new baby learn about something new and becoming enlightened with a new toy.  They loved the shutter noise, but most of all they loved their own faces, "chimping" away in what seemd to me to be total fun for them........

 

 

 

Sulawesi Macaque All Rights Protected David Slater    Sulawesi Macaque copyright David J Slater    Sulawesi Macaque copyright David J Slater

 

It is now a worldwide story.

 

 

 

It is totally humbling and almost beyond my ability to write here just what impact these images have had. Some people admit to crying with laughter, other to crying with shock as they stare into the face of a close ancestor they never realised existed, and so uncannily like us humans.  And then they discover these creatures are hunted and in need of some publicity.  I have been inundated with wellwishers, as well as requests to appear on TV stations across the world, and a whole host of interviews for magazines and the press.

 

But my original intention was never for fame, but purely to get these endangered creatures a bit more publicity and maybe a bit of much needed earnings as well.  I knew it would be funny, and that was one other motive for sending out the pictures, that had until then been unoticed by the world.   It took me by complete surprise.  But I stuck to my philosophy and it was tough going under the pressure believe me. I still have not been on any TV show, purely in order to keep the limelight on the monkeys rather than myself, as I knew the press and media would simply keep the story on myself and my experience.  It's not what I wanted.

 

In fact, when my agent first persuaded me to publish, both I and they (Caters News Agency) thought it would NOT get in more than 3 or 4 UK papers.  I have to give much credit to Caters News at knowing how to get the photos in the press and knowing a good story.  I am a mere individual, who I have to admit, was unaware that this would be a loved story.  Indeed, I have had many encounters with cheeky monkeys before, some attempting to steal my camera, others trying to steal my car! (only kidding - but I once had a baboon in the drivers seat, hands on the steering wheel, after I left the window open in the Masaii Mara)

 

 

Here's a few comments to be found on forums or reader's comments:

 

"Possibly my favoutite thing ever", Chloe, West Yorkshire,

"I think I have dated him", Katie Price, Essex (and no, she hasn't dated the photographer - yet! No more phone calls please!)

Ha ha ha absolutely love these pictures, so funny!! it's hard to imagine them as wild animals", Priness Consuela Bananahammock,

"Dead ringer for Milliband", ER, London,

Awesomely done man!!! Awesome!!  Jason Ferguson, Canada

"Is anyone else seriously creeped out by those monkeys?", Sarah, USA

"The monkey's photoshop skills are equally impressive", Fertile Egg, USA

"This is how Planet of the Apes truly began", Anonymous Coward

"After reading about all the doom and gloom this made my day. Brilliant :))"  MrMuffin

 

 

 

I can only dream now that these little balls of fluff and joy will get more recognition and hopefully help than had been occuring before my pictures hit the news stands.  I intend in due course to contact the scientists and Indonesian department that run the national park in that isolated corner of Sulawesi to offer what help I can to those monkeys.

 

 

 

Sulawesi Macaque copyright David J Slater

 

Buton macaque  Macaca ochreata brunnescens

Buton Island lies at the extreme south-eastern tip of Sulawesi.  Here is found a variant of the common Booted macaque of the Sulawesi mainland, often taken to be a subspecies.   

 

 

Sulawesi Macaque copyright David J Slater

 

Here we can see the distinguishing pale "boots" of the macaque.  These macaques live in rainforest habitat, with home ranges of only a square kilometre or two.  Group sizes are quite small at around 20 individuals, but where these monkeys are exploiting farm crops within villages, their numbers swell to double this or more.

 

 

Sulawesi Macaque copyright David J Slater

 

Here, a mature male is attempting to steal coconuts....

 

 

Sulawesi Macaque copyright David J Slater

....and here it's sweet potato.

Sulawesi, and indeed all tropical rainforest requires from the photographer some super-human affort to record what they witness.  Diplomacy and asking local (western) scientists for help is all part of the process, and believe me, this is often more difficult than the physical demands on the body.  I often look at the photos and say, hey that looks easy!  But anyone who as ever been to the tropical rainforests of Asia and elsewhere with a camera will know exactly what I am trying to say.  Monkey photography especially requires dedication and patience in the extreme.  It's tough, even for an experienced mountaineer like myself, used to harsh environments and danger.  Give it a go if you think I am talking silly!

link, link, link, 

 

back to Sulawesi Gallery







here is the outline for the assignment:

3D. SUBMIT Final Publishing Utopia (Part 3 of 3) 
Due Nov 24 by 11:59pm Points 100 Submitting a text entry box, a website url, a media recording, or a file upload Attempts 0 Allowed Attempts 1


Goal 
This assignment asks you to reimagine the publishing ecosystem. You will choose a problem exemplified by a current lawsuit, proposed plan, or case study to examine a part of the publishing system. You will identify the key issues and propose solutions. You may work independently or in small groups up to 3 people. 

Copyright law in the United States flows from the Constitutions directive to “Promote the progress of science and the Useful Arts” by granting creators a “limited monopoly.” The idea is that copyright has limits because creators need to be able to build on previous works to continue to progress science and art. This means that there are tensions between the interests of people who hold copyrights that generate revenue and people who want to create new things that build on existing works. 

This assignment will allow you to apply your knowledge to address the following goals: 

Identify problems in publishing that are not beneficial to creators and users 
Acknowledge the roles that publishers, creators, and libraries play in creating, sustaining, or disrupting these problems 
Identify specific economic challenges to widely sharing research or creative work 
Use scholarly and popular sources in music to support your proposal of a “publishing utopia” 
Generate or curate solutions to selected problem along with implementation plan 
Communicate scholarly information and research to a general audience 
Demonstrate copyright knowledge in your choices of audio selections 
Overview 
Your project can take any form except a written research paper. Examples of a final assignment could include, but are not limited to: 

A podcast that lays out the issues and how your system solves it. Use an interview style that clearly identifies problems and clearly articulates solutions. (Pieces should be no longer than 8 minutes.) 
A musical composition that embodies and explains your system. 
A manifesto that lays out the principles behind your system and why you are demanding changes. A manifesto is a public declaration of policy and aims, especially one issued before an election by a political party or candidate. Here is an example of a manifestoLinks to an external site. related to this assignment. 
A textbook chapter that would explain your system to a defined audience of learners. 
Criteria for Successful Projects
Identify clearly what you see as the key problem you take away from the selected resource(s). There is no wrong or right answer here! 
Explain why you chose this issue and give a clear explanation of why this is a problem. 
Posit solutions to the problems, both legal and structural, that would lead to a more balanced, equitable, and creative publishing utopia. They do not have to be original! You can identify existing solutions, endorse one, and make suggestions for its successful implementation. (There are many existing solutions, but your project should address why!) 
Use additional sources to bolster the arguments for the above bullet points. Sources can be used to find examples of existing solutions, critique failed solutions (and posit do-overs that avoid pitfalls) and give context to your problem. 
Gather at least 5 sources, but over 8 sources may prove difficult and are not recommended. *Remember that you must cite your sources throughout your final project! For example, a podcast will include a script which will include footnotes as-needed. An original song will include separate foot-noted lyrics, etc. 
Submitting Assignment 
While projects may vary in file format, be sure to submit with proper file naming conventions [Surname(s)_Final_Your Project Title].  

Submit your project via Canvas. Because some projects may include or exist as a hyperlink, you may also submit as a text box entry. 



















here is my project proposal for the project:

Brian Ellis

Proposal: FIXED

For my “Publishing Utopia” project, I propose creating: “FIXED”, a generative zine discussing generative, adaptive, and modular artwork, and how copyright applies to the processes, inputs, and outputs of such arts. The zine will highlight a major issue with tooling, the challenge with fixing artwork “in a tangible medium”, why this is problematic, and propose a new way to “fix” the issue. 

The specific issue I would like to highlight is a rather arbitrary delineation of where in the process generative or stochastic processes are used in a creative practice, and how currently, if they are at the final step of an otherwise elaborate process, the copyright office does not recognize the output with copyright protection, invaldiating the protections that other artists enjoy afforded to the entire process. 

I will examine 5 sample works of art, including:
Mozart’s “Musikalisches Würfelspiel” (Musical Dice Games)
Sol LeWitt Wall Drawing #118
The “Monkey Selfie” by David J Slater
A ChatGPT generated poem about copyright in the style of Shakespear
My own work, “I am sitting in a latent space”

And I will analyze how, in each of these instances, stochasic, random, and otherwise non-human authors have a role in the creation of the final output, but in only a few, rather arbitrary cases, these final products are not protected by copyright. I will then propose to both fix this by extending protection to works that have substantive human authorship at any point in the creative process, as well as offer alternatives for documentation or presentation that creatives can use now to protect their work in the current landscape.

This is of the utmost importance with the increasing prominence of AI art, and creators using AI in their artmaking practices. Whole swaths of creative processes (including many of my own) are at risk of being invalidated and not protected because of these arbitrary and problematic deliniations.


Research plan:
Primary Sources:
Artistic work such as:
Mozart’s “Musikalisches Würfelspiel”, sheet music and instructions.
Sol LeWitt’s Wall Drawing #118, both instructions, instantiations, and photographs.
David J. Slater’s “Monkey Selfie” output and process description, as discussed in lawsuit details
A ChatGPT poem I will prompt on my own.
My own work, “I am sitting in a latent space”
Publications such as:
Legal proceedings surrounding the Monkey Selfie
The legal notices from the US Copyright office.
Most priminantly this, though others may be relevant.
Secondary Sources: I will pull from a variety of secondary sources including:
Law review articles discussing AI and generative art
News articles discussing the public opinion
Databases and aggregators including:
JSTOR - For articles and discussions about process music
Project MUSE - for 
Artstor - For references for visual art
Leonardo Music Journal (MIT Press) - for more articles and discussions on generative art and music.
Google Scholar - for everything else
Potential Challenges:
Common Keywords: “copyright” is a challenging search term, because often texts that have a copyright statement (“copyright 2024”, etc.) at the bottom are included in searches, even if their topic has nothing to do with copyright. One potential approach to this is to use more specific terms like “authorship”, “intelectual property” or “copyright protection”.
Schedule:
November 11: Gather 5-10 additional sources beyond the 6 I already have
November 16: Create my annotated bibliography, with at least 10-15 sources, following the assignment guideline.
November 18: Draft initial sections of the zine, including all samples, variable processes, and identify 
By November 21: Complete a full project draft, and create a first print
By November 23: Finalize the document of the zine that will be submitted, and begin the final printing and creation proces
By November 24: Document the final zine for online submission.



here is the annotated bib:

Brian Ellis

Annotated Bibliography


Benford, Steve, Marco Amerotti, Bob Sturm, and Juan Martinez Avila. “Negotiating Autonomy and Trust When Performing with an AI Musician.” ACM, September 16, 2024, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1145/3686038.3686040.

This article is particularly interesting because it discusses different forms of trust, listening, and responsiveness built into different AI collaborative music partners. This is a really useful framework to have when analyzing my own AI musical creative work, and I think will be a  good framework and reference to have. The article summarizes their workflow developing LOERIC,  an AI musician that plays along with the live human performers,  the challenges they encountered along the way, and the different conventions of trust that they developed while working and performing alongside the AI musician. These are music technology researchers writing for a music technology journal, so they are not afraid to get highly technical in their language and showcase the parts of their work that they think are most technically interesting. 

Chused, Richard. “‘Temporary’ Conceptual Art: Property and Copyright, Hopes and Prayers.” Intellectual Property Law Commons, 2019. https://digitalcommons.nyls.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2394&context=fac_articles_chapters.

This is a longer article that dives into different questions of ownership primarily around questions of conceptual art, with a specific lens at the Sol LeWitt wall drawings. Of this longer work, the relevant sections are around redefining authorship and copyright, where the author makes a strong case for different ways to divide up authorship attribution among different collaborative processes. One particularly interesting highlight is the usage of “derivative works”  to discuss outputs  of conceptual art as being markedly different from the concept / process / instructions that created it.  I'm not sure how much I agree with this assessment, but I think this is a valuable opinion to have represented.   The author is another copyright lawyer, associated with the New York law school, in this writing, specifically directed for the digital commons  feels quite exploratory - it begins by calling itself a “meditation”.


Edwards, Michael. “Algorithmic Composition.” Communications of the ACM 54, no. 7 (July 1, 2011): 58. https://doi.org/10.1145/1965724.1965742.

This article by Michael Edwards gives a very good overview of computer music and algorithmic processes used in composition across the long arc of the Western Canon,  including many valuable work samples and examples to draw from. This author was writing for the Association for Computer Machinery, and is therefore a more technical oriented  audience, rather than a musically focused audience. The source should therefore be quite valuable for discussions around the contextualization of AI and the broader historical president from which it comes from.



Efthimiadis, Rhea. “Copyright Registration Guidance: Works Containing Material Generated by Artificial Intelligence ,” March 16, 2023. https://www.copyright.gov/ai/ai_policy_guidance.pdf.

This is the actual policy guideline  recommendation from the United States copyright office. It gives a very detailed breakdown of their thought process of what exactly copyright has to offer in the domain of artificial intelligence and other generative media, and their reasoning as to how they approach this answer. This recommendation was written by the officials at the copyright office aiming to provide clear and actionable guidance to individuals submitting their work for copyright protection, so it is written targeted at a general public and is quite accessible, even as they need it to be legally defensible.  Realistically, if I am proposing any substantial change to copyright policy, this is the document that I need to tear apart and poke holes in. This is going to be quite a challenge!

Mozart, W. A. Musikalisches Würfelspiel, K.Anh.C.30.01. Score. Bonn: N. Simrock, 1793.

This is a beautiful primary source of a scan of the original Mozart  publication that includes the table of music, instructions, and the table of figures that tells a musician how to perform the work.  as this is a primary source directed at sheet music buyers in the 1700s,  it is provided in a number of different languages and is written to be as accessible as possible in the language of the time.  I think this is an excellent source example of an algorithmic work that shares some of its creative power with random chance, and therefore is an excellent source for analysis.

Siderits, Jonathan. “The Case for Copyrighting Monkey Selfies .” University of Cincinnati Law Review 84, no. 11 (April 2018): Article 9.

This article proposes a compelling framework for how to articulate differences in authorship, differentiating those that are uncopyrightable and true “works of nature” from those that are “quasi” works of nature (human/ nature partnerships)  and therefore should be protected, or partially protected, under copyright. This article is written by a copyright law lawyer for a law review journal, and therefore is highly technical and detailed and it's legallease, and is furthermore articulating a strong rebuttal to the existing paradigms and court cases.  I think this piece will be most useful for me structuring the way I should approach my argument, as its arguments are compelling, and mine will follow a similar thread.
